# The Second Book of Moses, called Exodus

## Chapter 1

**<sup>1</sup>** These are the names of the sons of Israel who came to Egypt with Jacob, each man with his household: **<sup>2</sup>** Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, **<sup>3</sup>** Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin, **<sup>4</sup>** Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher. **<sup>5</sup>** All the persons who came from Jacob’s own body were seventy; but Joseph was already in Egypt. **<sup>6</sup>** Then Joseph died, and all his brothers, and all that generation. **<sup>7</sup>** But the sons of Israel were fruitful and multiplied greatly and became exceedingly numerous, so that the land was filled with them.

**<sup>8</sup>** Then a new king arose over Egypt, who did not know Joseph. **<sup>9</sup>** He said to his people, “Behold, the nation of the sons of Israel is more numerous and mightier than we. **<sup>10</sup>** Come, let us deal shrewdly with them, lest they multiply further and, in the event of war, join our enemies and fight against us and leave the land.” **<sup>11</sup>** So they set taskmasters over them to oppress them with forced labor, and they built for Pharaoh the store cities of Pithom and Raamses. **<sup>12</sup>** But the more they oppressed them, the more they multiplied and spread abroad, so that the Egyptians came to dread the sons of Israel. **<sup>13</sup>** So the Egyptians harshly enslaved the sons of Israel. **<sup>14</sup>** They made their lives bitter with hard labor in mortar and brick, and in all kinds of work in the field—every form of service in which they made them serve was done with cruelty.

**<sup>15</sup>** Then the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives, one of whom was named Shiphrah and the other Puah, **<sup>16</sup>** and he said, “When you attend the Hebrew women and see them on the birthstool, if it is a son, you shall kill him; but if it is a daughter, she shall live.” **<sup>17</sup>** But the midwives feared God and did not do as the king of Egypt commanded them, but let the boys live. **<sup>18</sup>** Then the king of Egypt summoned the midwives and said to them, “Why have you done this thing and let the boys live?” **<sup>19</sup>** The midwives said to Pharaoh, “Because the Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women, for they are vigorous and give birth before the midwife comes to them.” **<sup>20</sup>** So God dealt well with the midwives, and the people multiplied and became very strong. **<sup>21</sup>** And because the midwives feared God, he gave them families of their own.

**<sup>22</sup>** Then Pharaoh commanded all his people, saying, “Every son who is born, you shall cast into the Nile, but every daughter you shall let live.” 

## Chapter 2

**<sup>1</sup>** A man from the house of Levi went and took as his wife a daughter of Levi. **<sup>2</sup>** The woman conceived and bore a son. When she saw that he was beautiful, she hid him for three months. **<sup>3</sup>** But when she could no longer hide him, she took for him a papyrus basket, coated it with tar and pitch, placed the child inside it, and set it among the reeds along the bank of the Nile. **<sup>4</sup>** His sister stood at a distance to see what would happen to him.

**<sup>5</sup>** Then the daughter of Pharaoh came down to bathe at the Nile, while her maidens walked along the riverbank. She saw the basket among the reeds and sent her maidservant, and she took it. **<sup>6</sup>** When she opened it, she saw the child—and the boy was crying. She had compassion on him and said, “This is one of the Hebrews’ children.” **<sup>7</sup>** Then his sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Shall I go and call a nurse from the Hebrew women for you, that she may nurse the child for you?” **<sup>8</sup>** Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Go.” So the young girl went and called the child’s mother. **<sup>9</sup>** Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Take this child and nurse him for me, and I will give you your wages.” So the woman took the child and nursed him. **<sup>10</sup>** When the child grew older, she brought him to Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. She named him Moses, saying, “Because I drew him out of the water.”

**<sup>11</sup>** In those days, when Moses had grown up, he went out to his brothers to see how they were being mistreated. He saw an Egyptian striking a Hebrew, one of his brothers. **<sup>12</sup>** He looked around, and when he saw that no one was there, he struck the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. **<sup>13</sup>** The next day he went out and saw two Hebrews fighting. He said to the one in the wrong, “Why do you strike your companion?” **<sup>14</sup>** The man replied, “Who made you ruler and judge over us? Are you thinking of killing me as you killed the Egyptian?” Then Moses was afraid and said, “Surely the matter has become known.” **<sup>15</sup>** When Pharaoh heard what happened, he sought to kill Moses. But Moses fled from Pharaoh and settled in the land of Midian, where he sat down by a well.

**<sup>16</sup>** Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters. They came and drew water and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock. **<sup>17</sup>** Then some shepherds came and drove them away, but Moses came and rescued them and watered their flock. **<sup>18</sup>** When they came home to Reuel their father, he said, “Why have you come back so soon today?” **<sup>19</sup>** They said, “An Egyptian rescued us from the shepherds, and he even drew water for us and watered the flock.” **<sup>20</sup>** He said to his daughters, “Then where is he? Why did you leave the man? Call him, that he may eat bread.” **<sup>21</sup>** Moses agreed to stay with the man, and he gave Moses his daughter Zipporah. **<sup>22</sup>** She bore a son, and he named him Gershom, for he said, “I have been a sojourner in a foreign land.”

**<sup>23</sup>** Now it came about in the course of those many days that the king of Egypt died. The sons of Israel groaned under their bondage and cried out, and their cry for help rose up to God because of their slavery. **<sup>24</sup>** God heard their groaning, and God remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. **<sup>25</sup>** God saw the sons of Israel, and God took notice of them. 

## Chapter 3

**<sup>1</sup>** Now Moses was tending the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law, the priest of Midian. He led the flock to the far side of the wilderness and came to Horeb, the mountain of God. **<sup>2</sup>** The angel of the LORD appeared to him in a flame of fire from within a bush. He looked, and behold, the bush was burning with fire, but the bush was not consumed.

**<sup>3</sup>** So Moses said, “I will turn aside and see this marvelous sight—why the bush is not burned up.”

**<sup>4</sup>** When the LORD saw that he turned aside to look, God called to him from within the bush, “Moses, Moses!” And he said, “Here I am.” **<sup>5</sup>** Then He said, “Do not come any closer. Take your sandals off your feet, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.” **<sup>6</sup>** And He said, “I am the God of your father—the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” Then Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God.

**<sup>7</sup>** Then the LORD said, “I have surely seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and I have heard their cry because of their taskmasters. I know their sufferings, **<sup>8</sup>** and I have come down to rescue them from the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up from that land to a good and broad land—a land flowing with milk and honey—to the place of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. **<sup>9</sup>** And now, behold, the cry of the sons of Israel has reached Me, and I have also seen the oppression with which the Egyptians are oppressing them. **<sup>10</sup>** So now, go. I am sending you to Pharaoh so that you may bring My people, the sons of Israel, out of Egypt.”

**<sup>11</sup>** But Moses said to God, “Who am I that I should go to Pharaoh and that I should bring the sons of Israel out of Egypt?”

**<sup>12</sup>** And He said, “I will be with you, and this shall be the sign for you that I have sent you: when you have brought the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God on this mountain.”

**<sup>13</sup>** Then Moses said to God, “If I go to the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘The God of your fathers has sent me to you,’ and they ask me, ‘What is His name?’ what shall I say to them?”

**<sup>14</sup>** God said to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM.” And He said, “Thus you shall say to the sons of Israel: ‘I AM has sent me to you.’” **<sup>15</sup>** God also said to Moses, “Thus you shall say to the sons of Israel: ‘The LORD, the God of your fathers—the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob—has sent me to you.’ This is My name forever, and thus I am to be remembered throughout all generations.” **<sup>16</sup>** “Go and gather the elders of Israel and say to them, ‘The LORD, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has appeared to me, saying, “I have surely visited you and seen what has been done to you in Egypt; **<sup>17</sup>** and I have said that I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt to the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite—to a land flowing with milk and honey.”’

**<sup>18</sup>** They will listen to your voice, and you shall go—you and the elders of Israel—to the king of Egypt. And you shall say to him, ‘The LORD, the God of the Hebrews, has met with us. Now please let us go a three days’ journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the LORD our God.’ **<sup>19</sup>** But I know that the king of Egypt will not let you go unless compelled by a mighty hand. **<sup>20</sup>** So I will stretch out My hand and strike Egypt with all My wonders that I will do in its midst. After that, he will let you go. **<sup>21</sup>** And I will give this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians. When you go, you will not go empty-handed. **<sup>22</sup>** Every woman shall ask of her neighbor and of the woman who lives in her house articles of silver and gold and clothing. You shall put them on your sons and on your daughters. Thus you shall plunder the Egyptians.” 

## Chapter 4

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Moses answered and said, “But suppose they do not believe me or listen to my voice, but say, ‘The LORD has not appeared to you’?” **<sup>2</sup>** The LORD said to him, “What is that in your hand?” And he said, “A staff.” **<sup>3</sup>** Then He said, “Throw it on the ground.” So he threw it on the ground, and it became a serpent, and Moses fled from it. **<sup>4</sup>** But the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand and take it by the tail.” So he reached out his hand and caught it, and it became a staff in his hand. **<sup>5</sup>** “So that they may believe that the LORD, the God of their fathers—the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob—has appeared to you.”

**<sup>6</sup>** The LORD said further to him, “Put your hand inside your cloak.” So he put his hand inside his cloak, and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous, white like snow. **<sup>7</sup>** Then He said, “Put your hand back inside your cloak.” So he put his hand back inside his cloak, and when he took it out, behold, it was restored like the rest of his flesh. **<sup>8</sup>** “And it will be that, if they do not believe you or heed the voice of the first sign, they may believe the voice of the latter sign. **<sup>9</sup>** But if they do not believe even these two signs or listen to your voice, then you shall take some water from the Nile and pour it on the dry ground, and the water that you take from the Nile will become blood on the dry ground.”

**<sup>10</sup>** But Moses said to the LORD, “Please, O Lord, I am not a man of words, neither in the past nor since You have spoken to Your servant, for I am slow of speech and slow of tongue.” **<sup>11</sup>** Then the LORD said to him, “Who has made man's mouth? Or who makes one mute, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? Is it not I, the LORD? **<sup>12</sup>** Now then, go, and I will be with your mouth and will teach you what you shall speak.” **<sup>13</sup>** But he said, “Please, O Lord, send someone else.” **<sup>14</sup>** Then the anger of the LORD burned against Moses, and He said, “Is there not Aaron your brother, the Levite? I know that he speaks well. And look—he is coming out to meet you, and when he sees you, he will rejoice in his heart. **<sup>15</sup>** You shall speak to him and put the words in his mouth. And I will be with your mouth and with his mouth, and will teach you both what to do. **<sup>16</sup>** He shall speak for you to the people, and it will be that he will be as a mouth for you, and you will be as God to him. **<sup>17</sup>** And you shall take this staff in your hand, with which you will perform the signs.”

**<sup>18</sup>** Then Moses went and returned to Jethro his father-in-law and said to him, “Please let me go, so that I may return to my brothers who are in Egypt and see whether they are still alive.” And Jethro said to Moses, “Go in peace.” **<sup>19</sup>** Now the LORD said to Moses in Midian, “Go back to Egypt, for all the men who were seeking your life are dead.” **<sup>20</sup>** So Moses took his wife and his sons, mounted them on a donkey, and returned to the land of Egypt. And Moses took the staff of God in his hand.

**<sup>21</sup>** The LORD said to Moses, “When you go back to Egypt, see that you perform before Pharaoh all the wonders that I have put in your hand. But I will harden his heart so that he will not let the people go. **<sup>22</sup>** Then you shall say to Pharaoh, ‘Thus says the LORD: Israel is My firstborn son, **<sup>23</sup>** and I say to you, Let My son go that he may serve Me. But if you refuse to let him go, behold, I will kill your firstborn son.’”

**<sup>24</sup>** Now it happened on the way, at the lodging place, that the LORD met him and sought to put him to death. **<sup>25</sup>** Then Zipporah took a flint and cut off her son’s foreskin and touched it to his feet, and she said, “Surely you are a bridegroom of blood to me.” **<sup>26</sup>** So He let him alone. At that time she said, “A bridegroom of blood,” because of the circumcision.

**<sup>27</sup>** The LORD said to Aaron, “Go to the wilderness to meet Moses.” So he went and met him at the mountain of God and kissed him. **<sup>28</sup>** Then Moses told Aaron all the words of the LORD with which He had sent him, and all the signs that He had commanded him to perform. **<sup>29</sup>** Then Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the sons of Israel. **<sup>30</sup>** And Aaron spoke all the words that the LORD had spoken to Moses, and he performed the signs before the eyes of the people. **<sup>31</sup>** And the people believed. And when they heard that the LORD had visited the sons of Israel and that He had seen their affliction, they bowed low and worshiped. 

## Chapter 5

**<sup>1</sup>** Afterward, Moses and Aaron went and said to Pharaoh, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘Let my people go, so that they may hold a festival for me in the wilderness.’”

**<sup>2</sup>** But Pharaoh said, “Who is the LORD that I should obey His voice and let Israel go? I do not know the LORD, and I also will not let Israel go.”

**<sup>3</sup>** Then they said, “The God of the Hebrews has met with us. Please, let us go a three-day journey into the wilderness to sacrifice to the LORD our God, lest He fall upon us with pestilence or with the sword.”

**<sup>4</sup>** But the king of Egypt said to them, “Moses and Aaron, why are you taking the people away from their work? Return to your labor!” **<sup>5</sup>** And Pharaoh said, “Behold, the people of the land are now many, and you would make them rest from their burdens!” **<sup>6</sup>** That same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people and their foremen, **<sup>7</sup>** “You shall no longer give the people straw to make bricks as before. Let them go and gather straw for themselves. **<sup>8</sup>** But you shall require of them the same quantity of bricks as they made before; you shall not diminish it. For they are idle—that is why they cry out, saying, ‘Let us go and sacrifice to our God.’ **<sup>9</sup>** Let the work be heavier upon the men, so that they will be occupied with it and not pay attention to deceptive words.”

**<sup>10</sup>** So the taskmasters of the people and their foremen went out and spoke to the people, saying, “Thus says Pharaoh, ‘I will not give you straw. **<sup>11</sup>** Go yourselves and get straw wherever you can find it, but your work will not be reduced in the least.’”

**<sup>12</sup>** So the people scattered throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw. **<sup>13</sup>** And the taskmasters pressed them, saying, “Complete your daily work, each day’s task, just as when there was straw.” **<sup>14</sup>** And the foremen of the sons of Israel, whom Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over them, were beaten and asked, “Why have you not completed your required amount of bricks yesterday and today, as before?”

**<sup>15</sup>** Then the foremen of the sons of Israel came and cried out to Pharaoh, saying, “Why do you deal this way with your servants? **<sup>16</sup>** There is no straw given to your servants, yet they say to us, ‘Make bricks!’ And behold, your servants are beaten, but the fault is with your own people.”

**<sup>17</sup>** But he said, “You are idle, you are idle! That is why you say, ‘Let us go and sacrifice to the LORD.’ **<sup>18</sup>** Now go and work. Straw will not be given to you, yet you must deliver the same quantity of bricks.”

**<sup>19</sup>** And the foremen of the sons of Israel saw that they were in trouble when they were told, “You must not reduce your daily number of bricks.” **<sup>20</sup>** When they left Pharaoh, they met Moses and Aaron, who were waiting to meet them, **<sup>21</sup>** and they said to them, “May the LORD look upon you and judge, because you have made us stink in the eyes of Pharaoh and in the eyes of his servants, and have put a sword in their hand to kill us.”

**<sup>22</sup>** Then Moses returned to the LORD and said, “Lord, why have You brought harm upon this people? Why did You ever send me? **<sup>23</sup>** For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in Your name, he has brought harm upon this people, and You have not delivered Your people at all.” 

## Chapter 6

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Now you will see what I will do to Pharaoh. For with a strong hand he will let them go, and with a strong hand he will drive them out of his land.”

**<sup>2</sup>** God spoke to Moses and said to him, “I am the LORD. **<sup>3</sup>** I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob as God Almighty, but by my name ‘the LORD’ I was not known to them. **<sup>4</sup>** I also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land in which they lived as sojourners. **<sup>5</sup>** Moreover, I have heard the groaning of the sons of Israel, whom the Egyptians are holding as slaves, and I have remembered my covenant. **<sup>6</sup>** Therefore say to the sons of Israel, ‘I am the LORD, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians. I will deliver you from their bondage, and I will redeem you with an outstretched arm and with great judgments. **<sup>7</sup>** I will take you as my own people, and I will be your God. Then you shall know that I am the LORD your God, who brought you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians. **<sup>8</sup>** And I will bring you into the land that I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. I will give it to you as a possession. I am the LORD.’”

**<sup>9</sup>** So Moses spoke thus to the sons of Israel, but they did not listen to Moses because of their broken spirit and harsh slavery.

**<sup>10</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, **<sup>11</sup>** “Go in, speak to Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the sons of Israel go out of his land.” **<sup>12</sup>** But Moses said before the LORD, “Behold, the sons of Israel have not listened to me. How then shall Pharaoh listen to me, for I am of uncertain speach?”

**<sup>13</sup>** But the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, and gave them a command for the sons of Israel and for Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt.

**<sup>14</sup>** These are the heads of their fathers’ houses:

The sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi; these are the clans of Reuben.

**<sup>15</sup>** The sons of Simeon: Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman; these are the clans of Simeon.

**<sup>16</sup>** These are the names of the sons of Levi according to their generations: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari; and the years of the life of Levi were one hundred thirty-seven years.

**<sup>17</sup>** The sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, by their clans.

**<sup>18</sup>** The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel; and the years of the life of Kohath were one hundred thirty-three years.

**<sup>19</sup>** The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the clans of the Levites according to their generations.

**<sup>20</sup>** Amram took Jochebed his father's sister as wife, and she bore him Aaron and Moses; and the years of the life of Amram were one hundred thirty-seven years.

**<sup>21</sup>** The sons of Izhar: Korah, Nepheg, and Zichri.

**<sup>22</sup>** The sons of Uzziel: Mishael, Elzaphan, and Sithri.

**<sup>23</sup>** Aaron took Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon, as his wife, and she bore him Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

**<sup>24</sup>** The sons of Korah: Assir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph; these are the clans of the Korahites.

**<sup>25</sup>** Eleazar, Aaron’s son, took one of the daughters of Putiel as his wife, and she bore him Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers of the Levites by their clans.

**<sup>26</sup>** It was this Aaron and Moses to whom the LORD said, “Bring out the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt by their hosts.” **<sup>27</sup>** They were the ones who spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt about bringing out the sons of Israel from Egypt—this Moses and this Aaron.

**<sup>28</sup>** And it came to pass, on the day when the LORD spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt, **<sup>29</sup>** the LORD said to Moses, “I am the LORD; speak to Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I tell you.” **<sup>30</sup>** But Moses said before the LORD, “Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips. How will Pharaoh listen to me?” 

## Chapter 7

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “See, I have made you as God to Pharaoh, and Aaron your brother shall be your prophet. **<sup>2</sup>** You shall speak all that I command you, and Aaron your brother shall speak to Pharaoh, that he may let the sons of Israel go out of his land. **<sup>3</sup>** But I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and though I multiply My signs and My wonders in the land of Egypt, **<sup>4</sup>** Pharaoh will not listen to you. Then I will lay My hand upon Egypt, and bring out My hosts, My people the sons of Israel, from the land of Egypt by great judgments. **<sup>5</sup>** And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I stretch out My hand over Egypt and bring out the sons of Israel from their midst.”

**<sup>6</sup>** So Moses and Aaron did just as the LORD commanded them; thus they did. **<sup>7</sup>** Now Moses was eighty years old and Aaron eighty-three years old when they spoke to Pharaoh.

**<sup>8</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, **<sup>9</sup>** “When Pharaoh speaks to you, saying, ‘Work a wonder,’ then you shall say to Aaron, ‘Take your staff and cast it down before Pharaoh, and it will become a serpent.’” **<sup>10</sup>** So Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh, and they did just as the LORD had commanded. Aaron cast down his staff before Pharaoh and before his servants, and it became a serpent.

**<sup>11</sup>** Then Pharaoh also summoned the wise men and the sorcerers, and they too, the magicians of Egypt, did the same by their secret arts. **<sup>12</sup>** Each man cast down his staff, and they became serpents. But Aaron’s staff swallowed up their staffs. **<sup>13</sup>** Yet Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he did not listen to them, just as the LORD had said.

**<sup>14</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Pharaoh’s heart is stubborn; he refuses to let the people go. **<sup>15</sup>** Go to Pharaoh in the morning as he is going out to the water, and station yourself to meet him on the bank of the Nile. And take in your hand the staff that was turned into a serpent. **<sup>16</sup>** And you shall say to him, ‘The LORD, the God of the Hebrews, has sent me to you, saying, “Let My people go, that they may serve Me in the wilderness.” But behold, you have not listened until now.’ **<sup>17</sup>** Thus says the LORD: ‘By this you shall know that I am the LORD: observe well, I will strike the water that is in the Nile with the staff that is in my hand, and it shall be turned to blood. **<sup>18</sup>** And the fish that are in the Nile shall die, and the Nile will stink, and the Egyptians will be weary of drinking water from the Nile.’”

**<sup>19</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, ‘Take your staff and stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt, over their rivers, over their canals, over their pools, and over all their reservoirs of water, so that they may become blood. And there shall be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, in vessels of wood and vessels of stone.’”

**<sup>20</sup>** So Moses and Aaron did just as the LORD had commanded. He raised the staff and struck the water that was in the Nile in the sight of Pharaoh and in the sight of his servants, and all the water that was in the Nile was turned to blood. **<sup>21</sup>** And the fish that were in the Nile died, and the Nile became foul, so that the Egyptians could not drink water from the Nile. And there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt.

**<sup>22</sup>** But the magicians of Egypt did the same by their secret arts; so Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he did not listen to them, just as the LORD had said. **<sup>23</sup>** Then Pharaoh turned and went into his house, and he did not even take this to heart. **<sup>24</sup>** So all the Egyptians dug around the Nile for water to drink, because they could not drink the water from the Nile.

**<sup>25</sup>** And seven days passed after the LORD had struck the Nile. 

## Chapter 8

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go in to Pharaoh and say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD: Let My people go, that they may serve Me. **<sup>2</sup>** But if you refuse to let them go, behold, I will plague all your territory with frogs. **<sup>3</sup>** The Nile will swarm with frogs, and they will go up and enter your house and into your bedroom and on your bed, and into the houses of your servants and your people, and into your ovens and kneading bowls. **<sup>4</sup>** The frogs will come up on you and on your people and on all your servants.’”

**<sup>5</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your hand with your staff over the rivers, over the canals, and over the pools, and bring up frogs upon the land of Egypt.’” **<sup>6</sup>** So Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt, and the frogs came up and covered the land of Egypt.

**<sup>7</sup>** But the magicians did the same by their secret arts and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.

**<sup>8</sup>** Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron and said, “Plead with the LORD to take away the frogs from me and from my people, and I will let the people go to sacrifice to the LORD.”

**<sup>9</sup>** Moses said to Pharaoh, “You may have the honor of telling me when I should plead for you and for your servants and for your people, to cause the frogs to be removed from you and from your houses and to remain only in the Nile.” **<sup>10</sup>** And he said, “Tomorrow.” So he said, “Let it be according to your word, so that you may know that there is no one like the LORD our God. **<sup>11</sup>** The frogs shall be removed from you and from your houses and from your servants and from your people; they shall remain only in the Nile.”

**<sup>12</sup>** Then Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh, and Moses cried out to the LORD concerning the frogs which He had brought upon Pharaoh. **<sup>13</sup>** And the LORD did according to the word of Moses: the frogs died out in the houses, the courtyards, and the fields. **<sup>14</sup>** And they gathered them together in heaps, and the land stank.

**<sup>15</sup>** But when Pharaoh saw that there was relief, he hardened his heart and did not listen to them, just as the LORD had said.

**<sup>16</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your staff and strike the dust of the ground, so that it may become gnats throughout all the land of Egypt.’” **<sup>17</sup>** And they did so. Aaron stretched out his hand with his staff and struck the dust of the ground, and it became gnats on man and beast. All the dust of the ground became gnats throughout all the land of Egypt. **<sup>18</sup>** The magicians tried with their secret arts to bring forth gnats, but they could not. So there were gnats on man and beast. **<sup>19</sup>** Then the magicians said to Pharaoh, “This is the finger of God.” But Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he did not listen to them, just as the LORD had said.

**<sup>20</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Rise early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh, as he goes out to the water, and say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD: Let My people go, that they may serve Me. **<sup>21</sup>** For if you do not let My people go, then I will send swarms of flies on you and on your servants and on your people and into your houses. And the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms, and also the ground on which they stand. **<sup>22</sup>** But on that day I will set apart the land of Goshen, where My people dwell, so that no swarms shall be there, so that you may know that I am the LORD in the midst of the land. **<sup>23</sup>** And I will make a distinction between My people and your people. Tomorrow this sign shall happen.’”

**<sup>24</sup>** And the LORD did so. There came great swarms of flies into the house of Pharaoh and into the houses of his servants, and throughout all the land of Egypt the land was ruined because of the swarms. **<sup>25</sup>** Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron and said, “Go, sacrifice to your God within the land.”

**<sup>26</sup>** But Moses said, “It is not right to do so, for the sacrifice we offer to the LORD our God would be detestable to the Egyptians. If we offer what is detestable in the sight of the Egyptians, will they not stone us? **<sup>27</sup>** We must go a three days’ journey into the wilderness and sacrifice to the LORD our God, just as He has commanded us.”

**<sup>28</sup>** So Pharaoh said, “I will let you go, that you may sacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilderness, only you shall not go very far away. Plead for me.”

**<sup>29</sup>** Then Moses said, “Behold, I am going out from you, and I will plead with the LORD that the swarms may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people tomorrow. Only let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully again by not letting the people go to sacrifice to the LORD.” **<sup>30</sup>** So Moses went out from Pharaoh and pleaded with the LORD. **<sup>31</sup>** And the LORD did according to the word of Moses: He removed the swarms from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people. Not one remained.

**<sup>32</sup>** But Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also and did not let the people go. 

## Chapter 9

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go in to Pharaoh and speak to him: ‘Thus says the LORD, the God of the Hebrews, “Send out My people, so that they may serve Me. **<sup>2</sup>** For if you refuse to send them out and still hold them, **<sup>3</sup>** then the hand of the LORD will come with a very severe plague upon your livestock which are in the field, on the horses, the donkeys, the camels, the herds, and the flocks. **<sup>4</sup>** But the LORD will make a distinction between the livestock of Israel and the livestock of Egypt, so that nothing will die of all that belongs to the sons of Israel.”’” **<sup>5</sup>** And the LORD set a definite time, saying, “Tomorrow the LORD will do this thing in the land.” **<sup>6</sup>** So the LORD did this thing on the next day, and all the livestock of Egypt died; but from the livestock of the sons of Israel, not one died. **<sup>7</sup>** Pharaoh sent men to look, and behold, not even one of the livestock of Israel had died. But Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he did not let the people go.

**<sup>8</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses and to Aaron, “Take handfuls of soot from a kiln, and have Moses scatter it toward the sky in the sight of Pharaoh. **<sup>9</sup>** It will become fine dust over all the land of Egypt, and become boils breaking out in sores on man and beast throughout all the land of Egypt.” **<sup>10</sup>** So they took soot from the kiln and stood before Pharaoh, and Moses scattered it toward the sky, and it became boils with sores breaking out on man and beast. **<sup>11</sup>** The magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils, for the boils were on the magicians as well as on all the Egyptians. **<sup>12</sup>** But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not listen to them, just as the LORD had spoken to Moses.

**<sup>13</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Rise early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh and say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD, the God of the Hebrews: “Send out My people, so that they may serve Me. **<sup>14</sup>** For this time I will send all My plagues upon your own heart, and upon your servants and your people, so that you may know that there is no one like Me in all the earth. **<sup>15</sup>** For if I had stretched out My hand and struck you and your people with the plague, then you would have been cut off from the earth. **<sup>16</sup>** But for this very reason I have raised you up, in order to show you My power, and in order that My name might be proclaimed throughout all the earth. **<sup>17</sup>** Still, you exalt yourself against My people by not letting them go.

**<sup>18</sup>** Behold, at this time tomorrow I will cause very heavy hail to fall, such as has not been in Egypt from the day it was founded until now. **<sup>19</sup>** And now, send word, bring your livestock and all that you have in the field into shelter. The hail will fall on every man and beast that is found in the field and is not brought indoors; it will fall on them, and they will die.”’” **<sup>20</sup>** Those among Pharaoh’s servants who feared the word of the LORD made their servants and livestock gather under shelter. **<sup>21</sup>** But those who did not pay attention to the word of the LORD left their servants and livestock in the field.

**<sup>22</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand toward the sky, so that hail may fall on all the land of Egypt, on man and beast and on every plant of the field throughout the land of Egypt.” **<sup>23</sup>** And Moses stretched out his staff toward the sky, and the LORD sent thunder and hail, and fire ran down to the earth. And the LORD rained hail on the land of Egypt. **<sup>24</sup>** So there was hail, and fire flashing continually in the midst of the hail, very severe, such as had never been in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation. **<sup>25</sup>** And the hail struck all that was in the field through all the land of Egypt, from man to beast; and the hail struck every plant of the field and shattered every tree of the field. **<sup>26</sup>** Only in the land of Goshen, where the sons of Israel were, there was no hail.

**<sup>27</sup>** Then Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron and said to them, “I have sinned this time; the LORD is righteous, and I and my people are guilty. **<sup>28</sup>** Plead with the LORD, for there has been enough of God’s thunder and hail. I will send you out, and you shall stay no longer.” **<sup>29</sup>** And Moses said to him, “As soon as I go out of the city, I will spread out my hands to the LORD; the thunder will cease, and there will be no more hail, so that you may know that the earth belongs to the LORD. **<sup>30</sup>** But as for you and your servants, I know that you do not yet fear the LORD God.” **<sup>31</sup>** (Now the flax and the barley were ruined, for the barley was in the ear and the flax was in bloom. **<sup>32</sup>** But the wheat and the spelt were not ruined, for they ripen late.)

**<sup>33</sup>** So Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh and spread out his hands to the LORD, and the thunder and the hail ceased, and rain no longer poured on the earth. **<sup>34</sup>** But when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunder had ceased, he sinned again and hardened his heart, both he and his servants. **<sup>35</sup>** So Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he did not let the sons of Israel go, just as the LORD had spoken through Moses. 

## Chapter 10

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart and the heart of his servants, so that I may display these signs of Mine among them, **<sup>2</sup>** and so that you may recount in the hearing of your sons and your grandsons how I dealt harshly with Egypt, and My signs which I have done among them, that you may know that I am the LORD.”

**<sup>3</sup>** So Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh and said to him, “Thus says the LORD, the God of the Hebrews: How long will you refuse to humble yourself before Me? Let My people go, that they may serve Me. **<sup>4</sup>** For if you refuse to let My people go, then tomorrow I will bring locusts into your territory. **<sup>5</sup>** They will cover the face of the land so that no one will be able to see the ground. They will consume the remainder of what has escaped—what is left to you after the hail—and they will eat every tree of yours that grows in the field. **<sup>6</sup>** They will fill your houses and the houses of all your servants and the houses of all the Egyptians—something your fathers and your forefathers have never seen since the day they came upon the earth until this day.” Then he turned and left Pharaoh's presence.

**<sup>7</sup>** Pharaoh’s servants said to him, “How long shall this man be a snare to us? Let the men go, so that they may serve the LORD their God. Do you not yet realize that Egypt is being ruined?”

**<sup>8</sup>** So Moses and Aaron were brought back to Pharaoh, and he said to them, “Go, serve the LORD your God. But who exactly will be going?”

**<sup>9</sup>** Moses said, “We will go with our young and our old; we will go with our sons and our daughters, with our flocks and our herds, for we must hold a feast to the LORD.”

**<sup>10</sup>** But he said to them, “Let the LORD be with you, if I ever let you and your little ones go! See now, evil is before your faces. **<sup>11</sup>** No! Go now, but only your men, and serve the LORD, for that is what you were seeking.” And they were driven out from Pharaoh’s presence.

**<sup>12</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, so that they may come upon the land of Egypt and consume every plant of the land, all that the hail has left behind.” **<sup>13</sup>** So Moses stretched out his staff over the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an east wind upon the land all that day and all that night. When it was morning, the east wind had brought the locusts.

**<sup>14</sup>** The locusts came up over all the land of Egypt and settled in all the territory of Egypt in great swarms. Never before had there been such locusts as these, nor will there ever be again. **<sup>15</sup>** For they covered the face of the whole land, so that the land was darkened. They consumed all the vegetation of the land and all the fruit of the trees that the hail had left. Nothing green remained on tree or plant in the field throughout all the land of Egypt.

**<sup>16</sup>** Then Pharaoh quickly summoned Moses and Aaron and said, “I have sinned against the LORD your God and against you. **<sup>17</sup>** Now please forgive my sin just this once, and plead with the LORD your God, that He would take this death away from me.”

**<sup>18</sup>** So he went out from Pharaoh and prayed to the LORD. **<sup>19</sup>** And the LORD turned the wind into a very strong west wind, and it lifted the locusts and drove them into the Red Sea. Not a single locust remained in all the territory of Egypt. **<sup>20</sup>** But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not let the children of Israel go.

**<sup>21</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand toward heaven, so that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, a darkness that can be felt.” **<sup>22</sup>** So Moses stretched out his hand toward heaven, and there was thick darkness in all the land of Egypt for three days. **<sup>23</sup>** They did not see one another, nor did anyone rise from his place for three days; but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings.

**<sup>24</sup>** Then Pharaoh called to Moses and said, “Go, serve the LORD; only let your flocks and your herds be kept back. Your little ones may go with you.”

**<sup>25</sup>** But Moses said, “You must also let us have sacrifices and burnt offerings, so that we may sacrifice them to the LORD our God. **<sup>26</sup>** Our livestock also must go with us—not a hoof shall be left behind—for we must take some of them to serve the LORD our God, and we will not know with what we are to serve the LORD until we arrive there.”

**<sup>27</sup>** But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he was unwilling to let them go. **<sup>28</sup>** Then Pharaoh said to him, “Get away from me! Take care never to see my face again, for on the day you see my face you shall die.”

**<sup>29</sup>** Moses said, “You have spoken rightly; I will never see your face again.” 

## Chapter 11

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “One more plague I will bring upon Pharaoh and upon Egypt. After that, he will send you out from here. When he sends you out, he will surely drive you out altogether. **<sup>2</sup>** Speak now in the hearing of the people that every man is to ask from his neighbor and every woman from her neighbor for silver items and gold items.” **<sup>3</sup>** And the LORD gave the people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians. Moreover, the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt—in the eyes of Pharaoh’s servants and in the eyes of the people.

**<sup>4</sup>** Moses said, “Thus says the LORD: ‘About midnight I will go out into the midst of Egypt, **<sup>5</sup>** and every firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sits on his throne to the firstborn of the servant woman who is behind the millstones, and all the firstborn of the cattle. **<sup>6</sup>** And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as has never been and such as shall never be again. **<sup>7</sup>** But not a dog shall growl against any of the sons of Israel, whether against man or beast, so that you may know that the LORD makes a distinction between Egypt and Israel.’ **<sup>8</sup>** Then all these your servants will come down to me and bow themselves before me, saying, ‘Go out, you and all the people who follow you!’ And after that I will go out.” And he went out from Pharaoh in hot anger.

**<sup>9</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Pharaoh will not listen to you, so that My wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.” **<sup>10</sup>** Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh, but the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not let the sons of Israel go out of his land. 

## Chapter 12

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, **<sup>2</sup>** “This month shall be the beginning of months for you; it shall be the first month of the year for you. **<sup>3</sup>** Speak to all the congregation of Israel, saying: On the tenth of this month, each man shall take a lamb for himself, according to his father's household—a lamb for each household. **<sup>4</sup>** And if the household is too small for a lamb, then he and his nearest neighbor shall take one according to the number of persons; you shall determine the amount needed for the lamb according to what each man eats. **<sup>5</sup>** Your lamb shall be without blemish, a year-old male. You may take it from the sheep or from the goats. **<sup>6</sup>** You shall keep it until the fourteenth day of this month, and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall slaughter it at twilight.

**<sup>7</sup>** Then they shall take some of the blood and put it on the two doorposts and on the lintel of the houses in which they eat it. **<sup>8</sup>** And they shall eat the flesh that night, roasted over fire; they shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. **<sup>9</sup>** Do not eat any of it raw or boiled in water, but only roasted over fire—its head with its legs and its inner parts. **<sup>10</sup>** You shall not leave any of it until morning, but anything that remains until morning you shall burn in the fire.

**<sup>11</sup>** This is how you shall eat it: with your loins girded, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and you shall eat it in haste—it is the LORD’s Passover. **<sup>12</sup>** For I will pass through the land of Egypt on that night, and I will strike down all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from man to beast; and I will execute judgments against all the gods of Egypt—I am the LORD. **<sup>13</sup>** And the blood shall be a sign for you on the houses where you are; and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and no plague will come upon you to destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt.

**<sup>14</sup>** This day shall be a memorial for you, and you shall keep it as a feast to the LORD; throughout your generations, you shall celebrate it as a permanent statute. **<sup>15</sup>** For seven days you shall eat unleavened bread. On the first day you shall remove leaven from your houses; for whoever eats anything leavened from the first day until the seventh day, that person shall be cut off from Israel. **<sup>16</sup>** On the first day you shall hold a holy assembly, and on the seventh day a holy assembly as well; no work at all shall be done on them, except what each person must eat—that alone may be prepared for you. **<sup>17</sup>** And you shall observe the Feast of Unleavened Bread, for on this very day I brought your hosts out of the land of Egypt; therefore you shall observe this day throughout your generations as a permanent statute.

**<sup>18</sup>** In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month in the evening, you shall eat unleavened bread until the twenty-first day of the month in the evening. **<sup>19</sup>** For seven days leaven shall not be found in your houses; for whoever eats what is leavened, that person shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel—whether a foreigner or a native of the land. **<sup>20</sup>** You shall not eat anything leavened; in all your dwellings you shall eat unleavened bread.”

**<sup>21</sup>** Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel and said to them, “Go and take for yourselves lambs according to your families, and slaughter the Passover lamb. **<sup>22</sup>** Then you shall take a bunch of hyssop and dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and apply some of the blood that is in the basin to the lintel and the two doorposts. And none of you shall go outside the door of his house until morning. **<sup>23</sup>** For the LORD will pass through to strike the Egyptians; and when He sees the blood on the lintel and on the two doorposts, the LORD will pass over the door and will not allow the destroyer to enter your houses to strike you.

**<sup>24</sup>** And you shall observe this event as a statute for you and for your sons forever. **<sup>25</sup>** And it will happen that when you enter the land which the LORD will give you, just as He promised, you shall keep this service. **<sup>26</sup>** And when your sons say to you, ‘What does this service mean to you?’ **<sup>27</sup>** you shall say, ‘It is the sacrifice of the LORD’s Passover, for He passed over the houses of the sons of Israel in Egypt when He struck the Egyptians, but spared our houses.’” And the people bowed low and worshiped. **<sup>28</sup>** Then the sons of Israel went and did so—just as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron, that's what they did.

**<sup>29</sup>** Then at midnight the LORD struck down all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the firstborn of the captive who was in the dungeon, and all the firstborn of the livestock. **<sup>30</sup>** Pharaoh arose in the night—he and all his servants and all the Egyptians—and there was great lamenting in Egypt, for there was no house where someone was not dead. **<sup>31</sup>** Then he called for Moses and Aaron at night and said, “Rise up, go out from among my people, both you and the sons of Israel; and go, serve the LORD, as you have said. **<sup>32</sup>** Take both your flocks and your herds, as you have said, and go—and bless me also.”

**<sup>33</sup>** And the Egyptians urged the people, to send them out of the land in haste, for they said, “We will all be dead.” **<sup>34</sup>** So the people took their dough before it was leavened, with their kneading bowls bound up in their cloaks on their shoulders. **<sup>35</sup>** And the sons of Israel did according to the word of Moses—they had asked from the Egyptians articles of silver and articles of gold and garments; **<sup>36</sup>** and the LORD gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so they granted them what they requested. So they plundered the Egyptians.

**<sup>37</sup>** Now the sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand men on foot, besides women and children. **<sup>38</sup>** And a mixed multitude also went up with them, along with flocks and herds, a very large number of livestock. **<sup>39</sup>** And they baked the dough which they had brought out of Egypt into cakes of unleavened bread, for it had not been leavened—because they were driven out of Egypt and could not delay, nor had they prepared provisions for themselves.

**<sup>40</sup>** Now the time that the sons of Israel lived in Egypt was four hundred and thirty years. **<sup>41</sup>** And at the end of four hundred and thirty years, to the very day, all the hosts of the LORD exited from the land of Egypt. **<sup>42</sup>** It was a night of watching for the LORD to bring them out of the land of Egypt; so this same night is a night of watching to the LORD for all the sons of Israel throughout their generations.

**<sup>43</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, “This is the statute of the Passover: no foreigner shall eat it. **<sup>44</sup>** But every man’s slave who is bought for money, after you have circumcised him, may eat of it. **<sup>45</sup>** A foreigner or a hired servant shall not eat of it. **<sup>46</sup>** It shall be eaten in a single house; you shall not bring any of the meat outside of the house, nor shall you break any of its bones. **<sup>47</sup>** All the congregation of Israel shall celebrate it. **<sup>48</sup>** But if a sojourner resides with you and wants to observe the Passover to the LORD, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near to observe it, and he shall be as a native of the land. But no uncircumcised person may eat of it. **<sup>49</sup>** The same law shall apply to the native as to the sojourner who resides among you.”

**<sup>50</sup>** Then all the sons of Israel did so; just as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron, that's what they did. **<sup>51</sup>** And it happened on that very day that the LORD brought the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their hosts. 

## Chapter 13

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Set apart to Me every firstborn, the first offspring of every womb among the sons of Israel, both of man and beast; it belongs to Me.”

**<sup>3</sup>** And Moses said to the people, “Remember this day in which you came out from Egypt, from the house of slavery, for by a powerful hand the LORD brought you out from this place. Nothing leavened shall be eaten. **<sup>4</sup>** On this day in the month of Abib you are going out. **<sup>5</sup>** And it shall be, when the LORD brings you into the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, which He swore to your fathers to give you—a land flowing with milk and honey—that you shall perform this service in this month. **<sup>6</sup>** Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there shall be a feast to the LORD. **<sup>7</sup>** Unleavened bread shall be eaten throughout the seven days, and nothing leavened shall be seen with you, nor shall any leaven be seen within all your borders. **<sup>8</sup>** And you shall tell your son on that day, saying, ‘I do this because of what the LORD did for me when I came out of Egypt.’ **<sup>9</sup>** And it shall be as a sign on your hand and as a reminder on your forehead, that the law of the LORD may be in your mouth; for with a mighty hand the LORD brought you out of Egypt. **<sup>10</sup>** Therefore you shall keep this ordinance at its appointed time from year to year.

**<sup>11</sup>** And it shall be, when the LORD brings you into the land of the Canaanite, as He swore to you and to your fathers and gives it to you, **<sup>12</sup>** that you shall set apart to the LORD every first offspring of the womb, and every firstborn of your livestock that are males shall belong to the LORD. **<sup>13</sup>** But every firstborn of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb, and if you do not redeem it, then you shall break its neck. And every firstborn of man among your sons you shall redeem.

**<sup>14</sup>** And it shall be, when your son asks you in time to come, saying, ‘What is this?’ then you shall say to him, ‘With a mighty hand the LORD brought us out from Egypt, from the house of slavery. **<sup>15</sup>** For when Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us go, the LORD killed every firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man and the firstborn of beast. Therefore I sacrifice to the LORD every male that first opens the womb, but every firstborn of my sons I redeem.’ **<sup>16</sup>** And it shall be as a sign on your hand and as frontlets between your eyes, for with a mighty hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt.”

**<sup>17</sup>** Now it happened, when Pharaoh let the people go, that God did not lead them by way of the land of the Philistines, though it was near; for God said, “Lest the people change their minds when they see war and return to Egypt.” **<sup>18</sup>** But God led the people around by the way of the wilderness to the Red Sea. And the sons of Israel went up in battle array from the land of Egypt.

**<sup>19</sup>** And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for Joseph had made the sons of Israel solemnly swear, saying, “God will surely visit you, and you shall carry up my bones with you from here.” **<sup>20</sup>** Then they set out from Succoth and camped at Etham, on the edge of the wilderness. **<sup>21</sup>** And the LORD was going before them by day in a pillar of cloud to lead them on the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, that they might travel by day and by night. **<sup>22</sup>** He did not take away the pillar of cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people. 

## Chapter 14

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, that they turn back and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea; before Baal-zephon you shall encamp opposite it, by the sea. **<sup>3</sup>** For Pharaoh will say of the sons of Israel, ‘They are wandering in the land; the wilderness has shut them in.’ **<sup>4</sup>** And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, so that he will pursue them, and I will get glory over Pharaoh and over all his army. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD.” And they did so.

**<sup>5</sup>** When the king of Egypt was told that the people had fled, Pharaoh and his servants had a change of heart toward the people, and they said, “What is this we have done, that we have let Israel go from serving us?” **<sup>6</sup>** So he made his chariot ready and took his people with him. **<sup>7</sup>** He took six hundred choice chariots and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over all of them. **<sup>8</sup>** And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued the sons of Israel as the sons of Israel were going out with a high hand. **<sup>9</sup>** Then the Egyptians pursued them—all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, his horsemen and his army—and overtook them encamped by the sea, by Pi-hahiroth, before Baal-zephon.

**<sup>10</sup>** When Pharaoh drew near, the sons of Israel lifted up their eyes, and saw the Egyptians were marching after them, and they were very afraid. And the sons of Israel cried out to the LORD. **<sup>11</sup>** They said to Moses, “Was it because there were no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness? What is this you have done to us by bringing us out of Egypt? **<sup>12</sup>** Isn’t this what we spoke about to you in Egypt, saying, ‘Leave us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians’? For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.” **<sup>13</sup>** And Moses said to the people, “Do not be afraid. Stand firm, and see the salvation of the LORD, which He will work for you today. For the Egyptians whom you see today, you shall never see again. **<sup>14</sup>** The LORD will fight for you, and you shall keep silent.”

**<sup>15</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Why do you cry to me? Tell the sons of Israel to go forward. **<sup>16</sup>** And you—lift up your staff and stretch out your hand over the sea, and divide it, so the sons of Israel may go through the sea on dry ground. **<sup>17</sup>** As for me, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians so that they follow after them, and I will magnify myself above Pharaoh and all his army, his chariots, and his horsemen. **<sup>18</sup>** Then the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I magnify myself Pharaoh, his chariots, and his horsemen.”

**<sup>19</sup>** And the angel of God, who was going before the camp of Israel, moved and went behind them. And the pillar of cloud moved from before them and stood behind them. **<sup>20</sup>** So it came between the camp of Egypt and the camp of Israel. And there was the cloud and darkness, yet it gave light by night. And the one did not come near the other all night.

**<sup>21</sup>** Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the LORD drove the sea back by a strong east wind all night and made the sea into dry land, and the waters were divided. **<sup>22</sup>** And the sons of Israel went through the midst of the sea on dry ground, and the waters were a wall to them on their right and on their left. **<sup>23</sup>** Then the Egyptians pursued and went in after them—all Pharaoh’s horses, his chariots, and his horsemen—into the midst of the sea.

**<sup>24</sup>** And in the morning watch, the LORD looked down on the camp of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and cloud, and He threw the Egyptian camp into confusion. **<sup>25</sup>** He removed the wheels from their chariots so that they drove them with difficulty. And the Egyptians said, “Let us flee from before Israel, for the LORD is fighting for them against the Egyptians.”

**<sup>26</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the sea, so that the waters may return upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots and upon their horsemen.” **<sup>27</sup>** So Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to its normal flow when the morning appeared. And the Egyptians fled into it, and the LORD overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea. **<sup>28</sup>** The waters returned and covered the chariots and the horsemen—all the army of Pharaoh that had gone in after them into the sea—not one of them survived. **<sup>29</sup>** But the sons of Israel walked on dry ground through the midst of the sea, and the waters were a wall to them on their right and on their left.

**<sup>30</sup>** Thus the LORD saved Israel that day from the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the seashore. **<sup>31</sup>** And Israel saw the great power that the LORD used against the Egyptians, and the people feared the LORD, and they believed in the LORD and in His servant Moses. 

## Chapter 15

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Moses and the sons of Israel sang this song to the LORD, saying:<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“I will sing to the LORD, for He is highly exalted;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The horse and its rider He has hurled into the sea.<br/>
**<sup>2</sup>** The Lord is my strength and song,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And He has become my salvation;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This is my God, and I will praise Him,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My father’s God, and I will exalt Him.<br/>
**<sup>3</sup>** The LORD is a warrior;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The LORD is His name.<br/>
**<sup>4</sup>** Pharaoh’s chariots and his army He cast into the sea,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And his elite officers were drowned in the Red Sea.<br/>
**<sup>5</sup>** The depths covered them;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They went down into the depths like a stone.

**<sup>6</sup>** Your right hand, O LORD, is majestic in power,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Your right hand, O LORD, shatters the enemy.<br/>
**<sup>7</sup>** In the greatness of Your majesty You overthrow those who rise up against You;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You send forth Your burning anger—it consumes them like stubble.<br/>
**<sup>8</sup>** At the blast of Your nostrils the waters were piled up,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The flowing waters stood up like a heap;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The deeps congealed in the heart of the sea.<br/>
**<sup>9</sup>** The enemy said, ‘I will pursue, I will overtake,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I will divide the spoil;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My desire shall be gratified against them;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I will draw my sword, my hand will destroy them.’<br/>
**<sup>10</sup>** But You blew with Your wind, and the sea covered them;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They sank like lead into the mighty waters.

**<sup>11</sup>** Who is like You among the gods, O LORD?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Who is like You, majestic in holiness,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Awesome in praises, working wonders?<br/>
**<sup>12</sup>** You stretched out Your right hand,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The earth swallowed them.<br/>
**<sup>13</sup>** In Your lovingkindness You have led the people whom You have redeemed;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In Your strength You have guided them to Your holy dwelling.

**<sup>14</sup>** The peoples have heard, they tremble;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anguish has seized the inhabitants of Philistia.<br/>
**<sup>15</sup>** Then the chiefs of Edom were dismayed;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The leaders of Moab, trembling grips them;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;All the inhabitants of Canaan have melted away.<br/>
**<sup>16</sup>** Terror and dread fall upon them;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;By the greatness of Your arm they are motionless as stone,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Until Your people pass through, O LORD,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Until the people pass through whom You have purchased.<br/>
**<sup>17</sup>** You will bring them and plant them in the mountain of Your inheritance,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The place, O LORD, which You have made for Your dwelling,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The sanctuary, O Lord, which Your hands have established.<br/>
**<sup>18</sup>** The LORD shall reign forever and ever.”

**<sup>19</sup>** For the horses of Pharaoh went with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the LORD brought back the waters of the sea upon them, but the sons of Israel walked on dry ground through the midst of the sea.

**<sup>20</sup>** Then Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took the tambourine in her hand, and all the women went out after her with tambourines and with dancing. **<sup>21</sup>** Miriam answered them,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Sing to the LORD, for He is highly exalted;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The horse and its rider He has hurled into the sea.”

**<sup>22</sup>** Then Moses led Israel from the Red Sea, and they went out into the Wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness and found no water. **<sup>23</sup>** When they came to Marah, they could not drink the waters of Marah, for they were bitter; therefore it was named Marah. **<sup>24</sup>** So the people grumbled against Moses, saying, “What shall we drink?” **<sup>25</sup>** Then he cried out to the LORD, and the LORD showed him a tree; and he threw it into the waters, and the waters became sweet.

There He made for them a statute and a regulation, and there He tested them.**<sup>26</sup>** And He said, “If you will diligently listen to the voice of the LORD your God, and do what is right in His eyes, and give ear to His commandments, and keep all His statutes, I will not bring upon you any of the diseases that I brought upon the Egyptians; for I am the LORD who heals you.”

**<sup>27</sup>** Then they came to Elim, where there were twelve springs of water and seventy date palms, and they encamped there beside the waters. 

## Chapter 16

**<sup>1</sup>** Then they set out from Elim, and all the congregation of the sons of Israel came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after they had gone out of the land of Egypt. **<sup>2</sup>** And the whole congregation of the sons of Israel grumbled against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness. **<sup>3</sup>** The sons of Israel said to them, “If only we had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of Egypt, when we sat by pots of meat, when we ate bread to the full; for you have brought us out into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly with hunger.”

**<sup>4</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Behold, I am about to rain bread from heaven for you, and the people shall go out and gather a day’s portion every day, so that I may test them, whether they will walk in My law or not. **<sup>5</sup>** And on the sixth day, when they prepare what they bring in, it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.”

**<sup>6</sup>** So Moses and Aaron said to all the sons of Israel, “At evening you will know that the LORD has brought you out of the land of Egypt, **<sup>7</sup>** and in the morning you will see the glory of the LORD, for He hears your grumblings against the LORD. And what are we, that you grumble against us?” **<sup>8</sup>** Moses also said, “When the LORD gives you meat to eat in the evening and bread to the full in the morning, because the LORD hears your grumblings which you grumble against Him—what are we? Your grumblings are not against us but against the LORD.”

**<sup>9</sup>** Then Moses said to Aaron, “Say to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, ‘Come near before the LORD, for He has heard your grumblings.’” **<sup>10</sup>** And it came about as Aaron spoke to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel, that they looked toward the wilderness, and behold, the glory of the LORD appeared in the cloud.

**<sup>11</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>12</sup>** “I have heard the grumblings of the sons of Israel. Speak to them, saying, ‘At twilight you shall eat meat, and in the morning you shall be filled with bread. Then you shall know that I am the LORD your God.’”

**<sup>13</sup>** So it came about in the evening that quail came up and covered the camp, and in the morning there was a layer of dew around the camp. **<sup>14</sup>** And when the layer of dew had lifted, behold, on the surface of the wilderness there was a fine flake-like thing, fine as frost on the ground. **<sup>15</sup>** When the sons of Israel saw it, they said to one another, “What is it?” For they did not know what it was. And Moses said to them, “It is the bread which the LORD has given you to eat.

**<sup>16</sup>** This is what the LORD has commanded: ‘Gather from it, each man as much as he may eat; you shall take an omer apiece according to the number of persons each of you has in his tent.’” **<sup>17</sup>** And the sons of Israel did so, and gathered, some more and some less. **<sup>18</sup>** When they measured it with an omer, the one who gathered much had nothing left over, and the one who gathered little had no lack; each man gathered as much as he could eat. **<sup>19</sup>** And Moses said to them, “Let no one leave any of it until morning.” **<sup>20</sup>** But they did not listen to Moses, and some left part of it until morning, and it bred worms and stank. So Moses was angry with them. **<sup>21</sup>** They gathered it morning by morning, each man as much as he could eat; but when the sun grew hot, it melted.

**<sup>22</sup>** Now on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for each one. And all the leaders of the congregation came and told Moses. **<sup>23</sup>** Then he said to them, “This is what the LORD has spoken: ‘Tomorrow is a day of rest, a holy sabbath to the LORD. Bake what you will bake and boil what you will boil, and all that is left over put aside to be kept until morning.’” **<sup>24</sup>** So they put it aside until morning, as Moses had ordered, and it did not stink, nor was there any worm in it. **<sup>25</sup>** And Moses said, “Eat it today, for today is a sabbath to the LORD; today you will not find it in the field. **<sup>26</sup>** Six days you shall gather it, but on the seventh day, the sabbath, there will be none.”

**<sup>27</sup>** And it came about on the seventh day that some of the people went out to gather, but they found none. **<sup>28</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “How long do you refuse to keep My commandments and My laws? **<sup>29</sup>** See, the LORD has given you the sabbath; therefore He gives you bread for two days on the sixth day. Each of you remain in his place; let no one go out of his place on the seventh day.” **<sup>30</sup>** So the people rested on the seventh day.

**<sup>31</sup>** And the house of Israel called its name Manna. And it was like coriander seed, white, and its taste was like wafers with honey. **<sup>32</sup>** Then Moses said, “This is what the LORD has commanded: ‘Let an omerful of it be kept throughout your generations, so that they may see the bread which I fed you in the wilderness when I brought you out of the land of Egypt.’” **<sup>33</sup>** And Moses said to Aaron, “Take a jar and put an omerful of manna in it, and place it before the LORD to be kept throughout your generations.” **<sup>34</sup>** As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron placed it before the testimony to be kept.

**<sup>35</sup>** And the sons of Israel ate the manna forty years, until they came to an inhabited land; they ate the manna until they came to the border of the land of Canaan. **<sup>36</sup>** (Now an omer is a tenth of an ephah.) 

## Chapter 17

**<sup>1</sup>** All the congregation of the sons of Israel set out from the Wilderness of Sin, according to the command of the LORD, and they camped at Rephidim, and there was no water for the people to drink.

**<sup>2</sup>** So the people quarreled with Moses and said, “Give us water so we may drink.” And Moses said to them, “Why do you quarrel with me? Why do you test the LORD?” **<sup>3</sup>** But the people thirsted there for water, and the people grumbled against Moses and said, “Why now have you brought us up out of Egypt to make me and my sons and my livestock die of thirst?”

**<sup>4</sup>** So Moses cried out to the LORD, saying, “What am I to do with this people? A little more and they will stone me.” **<sup>5</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, “Go on ahead of the people, and take with you some of the elders of Israel, and take in your hand the staff with which you struck the Nile,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and go.<br/>
**<sup>6</sup>** I will stand before you there on the rock at Horeb, and you shall strike the rock, and water will come out of it, and the people will drink.” And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel. **<sup>7</sup>** And he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah, because of the contention of the sons of Israel, and because they tested the LORD, saying, “Is the LORD among us or not?”

**<sup>8</sup>** Then Amalek came and fought with Israel at Rephidim.

**<sup>9</sup>** And Moses said to Joshua, “Choose men for us and go out, fight Amalek tomorrow. I will stand on the top of the hill with the staff of God in my hand.” **<sup>10</sup>** And Joshua did as Moses said to him and fought Amalek, while Moses, Aaron, and Hur<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;went up to the top of the hill.<br/>
**<sup>11</sup>** And it happened that when Moses raised his hand, Israel prevailed, and when he let his hand rest, Amalek prevailed. **<sup>12</sup>** But Moses’ hands grew heavy, so they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat on it, and Aaron and Hur supported his hands, one on one side and one on the other, so his hands were steady until the going down of the sun. **<sup>13</sup>** And Joshua overwhelmed Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.

**<sup>14</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Write this as a reminder in a book and recite it in the ears of Joshua, that I will utterly blot out the memory of Amalek<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from under heaven.”<br/>
**<sup>15</sup>** And Moses built an altar, and he called its name “The LORD is My Banner,” **<sup>16</sup>** and he said, “For a hand was against the throne of Yah. The LORD will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.” 

## Chapter 18

**<sup>1</sup>** Now Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses’ father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses and for Israel His people, how the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt.

**<sup>2</sup>** Then Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, took Zipporah, Moses’ wife, after he had sent her away, **<sup>3</sup>** and her two sons—of whom one was named Gershom, for Moses said, “I have been a sojourner in a foreign land,” **<sup>4</sup>** and the other was named Eliezer, for he said, “The God of my father was my help, and He delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh.”

**<sup>5</sup>** Then Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, came with his sons and his wife to Moses in the wilderness where he was camped, at the mountain of God. **<sup>6</sup>** And he sent word to Moses: “I, your father-in-law Jethro, am coming to you with your wife and her two sons with her.”

**<sup>7</sup>** So Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and he bowed down and kissed him. They asked each other about their welfare and went into the tent. **<sup>8</sup>** Then Moses recounted to his father-in-law all that the LORD had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel’s sake, all the hardship that had befallen them on the journey, and how the LORD had delivered them.

**<sup>9</sup>** Jethro rejoiced over all the goodness which the LORD had done for Israel, in delivering them from the hand of the Egyptians. **<sup>10</sup>** And Jethro said, “Blessed be the LORD, who delivered you from the hand of the Egyptians and from the hand of Pharaoh, and who delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians. **<sup>11</sup>** Now I know that the LORD is greater than all the gods; indeed, in the matter in which they dealt arrogantly against them, He was above them.”

**<sup>12</sup>** Then Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God, and Aaron came with all the elders of Israel to eat bread with Moses’ father-in-law before God.

**<sup>13</sup>** It came about the next day that Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood before Moses from the morning until the evening. **<sup>14</sup>** When Moses’ father-in-law saw all that he was doing for the people, he said, “What is this thing that you are doing for the people? Why do you sit alone as judge, while all the people stand before you from morning until evening?”

**<sup>15</sup>** Moses said to his father-in-law, “Because the people come to me to inquire of God. **<sup>16</sup>** When they have a dispute, it comes to me, and I judge between a man and his neighbor and make known the statutes of God and His laws.”

**<sup>17</sup>** Moses’ father-in-law said to him, “The thing that you are doing is not good. **<sup>18</sup>** You will surely wear yourself out, both you and these people who are with you, for the task is too heavy for you; you cannot do it alone. **<sup>19</sup>** Now listen to me; I will give you counsel, and God be with you. You be the representative for the people before God, and you bring the matters to God. **<sup>20</sup>** Then you shall warn them about the statutes and the laws, and make known to them the way in which they are to walk and the work they are to do.

**<sup>21</sup>** Furthermore, you shall choose out of all the people able men who fear God, men of truth, those who hate dishonest gain, and you shall place them as leaders over thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens. **<sup>22</sup>** Let them judge the people at all times. Let every major dispute be brought to you, but every minor case they themselves will judge. So it will be easier for you, and they will bear the burden with you. **<sup>23</sup>** If you do this thing and God so commands you, then you will be able to endure, and all these people also will go to their place in peace.”

**<sup>24</sup>** So Moses listened to his father-in-law and did all that he had said. **<sup>25</sup>** Moses chose able men out of all Israel and made them heads over the people: leaders of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens. **<sup>26</sup>** They judged the people at all times; the difficult cases they brought to Moses, but every minor case they judged themselves.

**<sup>27</sup>** Then Moses let his father-in-law depart, and he went his way to his own land. 

## Chapter 19

**<sup>1</sup>** On the third new moon after the sons of Israel had gone out of the land of Egypt, on that very day they came into the wilderness of Sinai. **<sup>2</sup>** They set out from Rephidim and came into the wilderness of Sinai, and they camped in the wilderness. Israel camped there in front of the mountain. **<sup>3</sup>** Then Moses went up to God, and the LORD called to him from the mountain, saying, “This is what you shall say to the house of Jacob, and declare to the sons of Israel: **<sup>4</sup>** ‘You have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bore you on eagles’ wings and brought you to Myself. **<sup>5</sup>** Now then, if you will indeed obey My voice and keep My covenant, then out of all the nations you shall be My treasured possession, for all the earth is Mine. **<sup>6</sup>** And you shall be to Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.’ These are the words that you shall speak to the sons of Israel.”

**<sup>7</sup>** So Moses came and summoned the elders of the people, and set before them all these words that the LORD had commanded him. **<sup>8</sup>** Then all the people answered together and said, “All that the LORD has spoken we will do.” And Moses brought back the words of the people to the LORD. **<sup>9</sup>** The LORD said to Moses, “Behold, I am coming to you in a thick cloud, so that the people may hear when I speak with you, and may also trust in you forever.” Then Moses reported the words of the people to the LORD.

**<sup>10</sup>** The LORD also said to Moses, “Go to the people and consecrate them today and tomorrow, and let them wash their garments. **<sup>11</sup>** And let them be ready for the third day, for on the third day the LORD will come down upon Mount Sinai in the sight of all the people. **<sup>12</sup>** You shall set boundaries for the people all around, saying, ‘Take care not to go up the mountain or touch the edge of it. Whoever touches the mountain shall surely be put to death. **<sup>13</sup>** No hand shall touch him, but he shall surely be stoned or shot through; whether beast or man, he shall not live.’ When the ram’s horn sounds a long blast, they shall come up to the mountain.”

**<sup>14</sup>** So Moses went down from the mountain to the people and consecrated them, and they washed their garments. **<sup>15</sup>** And he said to the people, “Be ready for the third day; do not go near a woman.”

**<sup>16</sup>** On the third day, when morning came, there was thunder and lightning and a thick cloud upon the mountain, and a very loud sound of a ram’s horn, so that all the people who were in the camp trembled. **<sup>17</sup>** Then Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet God, and they stood at the foot of the mountain. **<sup>18</sup>** Now Mount Sinai was wrapped in smoke, because the LORD had descended on it in fire. The smoke went up like the smoke of a kiln, and the whole mountain trembled violently. **<sup>19</sup>** As the sound of the ram’s horn grew louder and louder, Moses spoke, and God answered him in thunder.

**<sup>20</sup>** Then the LORD came down upon Mount Sinai, to the top of the mountain. And the LORD called Moses to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up. **<sup>21</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go down and warn the people, so they do not break through to the LORD to look, and many of them perish. **<sup>22</sup>** Also let the priests who come near to the LORD consecrate themselves, lest the LORD break out against them.” **<sup>23</sup>** Moses said to the LORD, “The people cannot come up to Mount Sinai, for You Yourself warned us, saying, ‘Set boundaries around the mountain and consecrate it.’” **<sup>24</sup>** But the LORD said to him, “Go down, and then come up again, you and Aaron with you. But do not let the priests or the people break through to come up to the LORD, lest He break out against them.” **<sup>25</sup>** So Moses went down to the people and told them. 

## Chapter 20

**<sup>1</sup>** Then God spoke all these words, saying,

**<sup>2</sup>** “I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.

**<sup>3</sup>** You shall have no other gods before Me.

**<sup>4</sup>** You shall not make for yourself a carved image, or any likeness of what is in heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the waters under the earth. **<sup>5</sup>** You shall not bow down to them or serve them; for I, the LORD your God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons, to the third and fourth generation of those who hate Me, **<sup>6</sup>** but showing steadfast love to thousands of those who love Me and keep My commandments.

**<sup>7</sup>** You shall not take up the name of the LORD your God in vain, for the LORD will not leave him unpunished who takes up His name in vain.

**<sup>8</sup>** Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. **<sup>9</sup>** Six days you shall labor and do all your work, **<sup>10</sup>** but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the LORD your God. On it you shall not do any work, you, your son or your daughter, your servant or your maid, your cattle, or the sojourner who is within your gates. **<sup>11</sup>** For in six days the LORD made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, but He rested on the seventh day; therefore the LORD blessed the Sabbath day and made it holy.

**<sup>12</sup>** Honor your father and your mother, so that your days may be prolonged in the land that the LORD your God is giving you.

**<sup>13</sup>** You shall not murder.

**<sup>14</sup>** You shall not commit adultery.

**<sup>15</sup>** You shall not steal.

**<sup>16</sup>** You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.

**<sup>17</sup>** You shall not covet your neighbor’s house; you shall not covet your neighbor’s wife, or his servant or his maid, or his ox or his donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor.”

**<sup>18</sup>** And all the people perceived the thunder and the flashes of lightning and the sound of the trumpet and the mountain smoking. When the people saw it, they trembled and stood at a distance. **<sup>19</sup>** Then they said to Moses, “You speak to us, and we will listen, but let not God speak to us, lest we die.”

**<sup>20</sup>** And Moses said to the people, “Do not fear, for God has come to test you, so that the fear of Him may be before you, that you may not sin.”

**<sup>21</sup>** So the people stood at a distance, while Moses approached the thick darkness where God was.

**<sup>22</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Thus you shall say to the sons of Israel: ‘You have seen for yourselves that I have spoken to you from heaven. **<sup>23</sup>** You shall not make other gods alongside Me; gods of silver or gods of gold you shall not make for yourselves.

**<sup>24</sup>** You shall make for Me an altar of earth, and you shall sacrifice on it your burnt offerings and your peace offerings, your sheep and your oxen. In every place where I cause My name to be remembered, I will come to you and bless you.

**<sup>25</sup>** If you make an altar of stone for Me, you shall not build it with hewn stones, for if you wield your tool upon it, you will profane it. **<sup>26</sup>** And you shall not ascend by steps to My altar, so that your nakedness may not be exposed upon it.’” 

## Chapter 21

**<sup>1</sup>** These are the ordinances which you shall set before them:

**<sup>2</sup>** If you buy a Hebrew servant, he shall serve six years, but in the seventh he shall go free without payment. **<sup>3</sup>** If he comes in by himself, he shall go out by himself; if he is married, then his wife shall go out with him. **<sup>4</sup>** If his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall belong to her master, and he shall go out by himself. **<sup>5</sup>** But if the servant plainly says, "I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free," **<sup>6</sup>** then his master shall bring him to God, and he shall bring him to the door or to the doorpost; and his master shall pierce his ear with an awl, and he shall serve him permanently.

**<sup>7</sup>** If a man sells his daughter as a maidservant, she shall not go out as the male servants do. **<sup>8</sup>** If she is displeasing in the eyes of her master who designated her for himself, then he shall let her be redeemed; he has no right to sell her to a foreign people since he has dealt deceitfully with her. **<sup>9</sup>** If he designates her for his son, he shall deal with her according to the custom of daughters. **<sup>10</sup>** If he takes to himself another woman, he shall not diminish her food, her clothing, or her marital rights. **<sup>11</sup>** And if he does not do these three things for her, then she shall go out free without payment of silver.

**<sup>12</sup>** He who strikes a man so that he dies shall surely be put to death. **<sup>13</sup>** But if he did not lie in wait, but God let it happen into his hand, then I will appoint you a place to which he may flee. **<sup>14</sup>** However, if a man acts presumptuously against his neighbor to kill him by deceit, you shall take him even from My altar, that he may die.

**<sup>15</sup>** He who strikes his father or his mother shall surely be put to death.

**<sup>16</sup>** He who kidnaps a man, whether he sells him or he is found in his possession, shall surely be put to death.

**<sup>17</sup>** He who curses his father or his mother shall surely be put to death.

**<sup>18</sup>** If men quarrel and one strikes the other with a stone or with his fist, and he does not die but is confined to his bed, **<sup>19</sup>** if he rises and walks about outside on his staff, then he who struck him shall go unpunished; only he shall pay for his loss of time and shall see to his complete healing.

**<sup>20</sup>** If a man strikes his servant or his maidservant with a rod and he dies at his hand, he shall surely be punished. **<sup>21</sup>** However, if he survives a day or two, no vengeance shall be taken; for he is his property.

**<sup>22</sup>** If men struggle with each other and strike a pregnant woman so that she gives birth prematurely but there is no injury, he shall surely be fined as the woman's husband demands of him, and he shall pay as the judges determine. **<sup>23</sup>** But if there is injury, then you shall appoint life for life, **<sup>24</sup>** eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, **<sup>25</sup>** burn for burn, wound for wound, bruise for bruise.

**<sup>26</sup>** If a man strikes the eye of his servant or the eye of his maidservant and destroys it, he shall let him go free on account of his eye. **<sup>27</sup>** And if he knocks out a tooth of his servant or of his maidservant, he shall let him go free on account of his tooth.

**<sup>28</sup>** If an ox gores a man or a woman to death, the ox shall surely be stoned, and its flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall go unpunished. **<sup>29</sup>** But if the ox was known to be accustomed to gore in the past and its owner had been warned but did not guard it, and it kills a man or a woman, the ox shall be stoned and its owner also shall be put to death. **<sup>30</sup>** If a ransom is imposed upon him, then he shall give for the redemption of his life whatever is imposed on him. **<sup>31</sup>** Whether it gores a son or a daughter, according to this judgment it shall be done to him. **<sup>32</sup>** If the ox gores a male servant or a female servant, he shall give to their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.

**<sup>33</sup>** If a man opens a pit, or if a man digs a pit and does not cover it, and an ox or a donkey falls into it, **<sup>34</sup>** the owner of the pit shall make restitution; he shall give money to its owner, and the dead animal shall become his.

**<sup>35</sup>** If one man's ox injures another's so that it dies, then they shall sell the live ox and divide its price equally, and they shall also divide the dead animal. **<sup>36</sup>** Or if it is known that the ox was accustomed to gore in the past and its owner has not kept it under guard, he shall surely pay ox for ox, and the dead animal shall become his. 

## Chapter 22

**<sup>1</sup>** If a man steals an ox or a sheep and slaughters it or sells it, he shall repay five oxen for an ox and four sheep for a sheep.

**<sup>2</sup>** If a thief is found breaking in and is struck so that he dies, there shall be no bloodguilt for him. **<sup>3</sup>** But if the sun has risen on him, there shall be bloodguilt for him. He shall make full restitution; if he has nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft. **<sup>4</sup>** If the stolen beast is found alive in his possession, whether it is an ox or a donkey or a sheep, he shall pay double.

**<sup>5</sup>** If a man causes a field or vineyard to be grazed over, or lets his beast loose so that it grazes in another man's field, he shall make restitution from the best of his own field or vineyard.

**<sup>6</sup>** If a fire breaks out and catches in thorns so that the stacked grain or the standing grain or the field is consumed, he who started the fire shall make full restitution.

**<sup>7</sup>** If a man gives his neighbor money or goods to keep safe, and they are stolen from the man's house, then if the thief is found, he shall pay double. **<sup>8</sup>** If the thief is not found, the owner of the house shall come near to God, to determine whether he has put his hand to his neighbor's property.

**<sup>9</sup>** For every breach of trust, whether it be for an ox, for a donkey, for a sheep, for a garment, or for any lost thing about which one says, "This is it," the case of both parties shall come before God. The one whom God condemns shall pay double to his neighbor.

**<sup>10</sup>** If a man gives to his neighbor a donkey, an ox, a sheep, or any beast to keep safe, and it dies or is injured or is driven away without anyone seeing it, **<sup>11</sup>** an oath by the LORD shall be between them both to see whether he has put his hand to his neighbor's property. The owner shall accept the oath, and he shall not make restitution. **<sup>12</sup>** But if it is stolen from him, he shall make restitution to the owner. **<sup>13</sup>** If it is torn by beasts, let him bring it as evidence. He shall not make restitution for what has been torn.

**<sup>14</sup>** If a man borrows anything of his neighbor, and it is injured or dies, the owner not being with it, he shall make full restitution. **<sup>15</sup>** If the owner was with it, he shall not make restitution. If it was hired, it came for its hiring fee.

**<sup>16</sup>** If a man entices a virgin who is not betrothed and lies with her, he shall pay the bride-price for her to be his wife. **<sup>17</sup>** If her father utterly refuses to give her to him, he shall pay money equivalent to the bride-price for virgins.

**<sup>18</sup>** You shall not permit a sorceress to live.

**<sup>19</sup>** Whoever lies with an animal shall be put to death.

**<sup>20</sup>** Whoever sacrifices to any god, other than the LORD alone, shall be devoted to destruction.

**<sup>21</sup>** You shall not wrong a sojourner or oppress him, for you were sojourners in the land of Egypt.

**<sup>22</sup>** You shall not mistreat any widow or fatherless child. **<sup>23</sup>** If you do mistreat them, and they cry out to me, I will surely hear their cry, **<sup>24</sup>** and my wrath will burn, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall become widows and your children fatherless.

**<sup>25</sup>** If you lend money to any of my people with you who is poor, you shall not be like a moneylender to him, and you shall not exact interest from him. **<sup>26</sup>** If ever you take your neighbor's cloak in pledge, you shall return it to him before the sun goes down, **<sup>27</sup>** for that is his only covering, and it is his cloak for his body. In what else shall he sleep? And if he cries to me, I will hear, for I am compassionate.

**<sup>28</sup>** You shall not revile God, nor curse a ruler of your people.

**<sup>29</sup>** You shall not delay to offer from the fullness of your harvest and from the outflow of your presses. The firstborn of your sons you shall give to me. **<sup>30</sup>** You shall do the same with your oxen and with your sheep. Seven days it shall be with its mother; on the eighth day you shall give it to me.

**<sup>31</sup>** You shall be consecrated to me. Therefore you shall not eat any flesh that is torn by beasts in the field; you shall throw it to the dogs. 

## Chapter 23

**<sup>1</sup>** Do not spread a false report. Do not join hands with a wicked man to be a malicious witness. **<sup>2</sup>** You shall not follow a crowd to do evil. Nor shall you testify in a dispute so as to pervert justice by siding with the majority. **<sup>3</sup>** Nor shall you show partiality to a poor man in his lawsuit.

**<sup>4</sup>** If you come across your enemy’s ox or his donkey going astray, you shall surely return it to him. **<sup>5</sup>** If you see the donkey of one who hates you lying under its burden, you shall refrain from leaving it to suffer; you shall surely help him with it.

**<sup>6</sup>** You shall not pervert the justice due to your poor in his lawsuit.

**<sup>7</sup>** Keep far from a false charge, and do not kill the innocent or the righteous, for I will not acquit the wicked.

**<sup>8</sup>** You shall not take a bribe, for a bribe blinds the clear-sighted and subverts the words of the righteous.

**<sup>9</sup>** You shall not oppress a sojourner. You know the mind of a sojourner, for you were sojourners in the land of Egypt.

**<sup>10</sup>** For six years you shall sow your land and gather in its produce, **<sup>11</sup>** but the seventh year you shall let it rest and lie fallow, so that the poor of your people may eat; and what they leave, the beast of the field shall eat. You shall do likewise with your vineyard and with your olive grove.

**<sup>12</sup>** Six days you shall do your work, but on the seventh day you shall rest, so that your ox and your donkey may rest, and the son of your female servant, and the sojourner, may be refreshed.

**<sup>13</sup>** Be careful to do all that I have said to you. Do not invoke the name of other gods, nor let it be heard on your lips.

**<sup>14</sup>** Three times in the year you shall hold a feast for Me. **<sup>15</sup>** You shall keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread. Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you, at the appointed time in the month of Aviv—for in it you came out of Egypt. No one shall appear before Me empty-handed. **<sup>16</sup>** Also the Feast of Harvest, the firstfruits of your labors, of what you sow in the field; and the Feast of Ingathering at the end of the year, when you gather in the produce of your labor from the field. **<sup>17</sup>** Three times in the year all your males shall appear before the Lord GOD.

**<sup>18</sup>** You shall not offer the blood of My sacrifice with leavened bread, nor shall the fat of My feast remain until morning.

**<sup>19</sup>** The best of the firstfruits of your ground you shall bring into the house of the LORD your God.

You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.

**<sup>20</sup>** Behold, I am sending an angel before you to guard you on the way and to bring you to the place that I have prepared. **<sup>21</sup>** Pay careful attention to him and listen to his voice. Do not rebel against him, for he will not pardon your transgression, for My name is in him. **<sup>22</sup>** But if you carefully listen to his voice and do all that I say, then I will be an enemy to your enemies and an adversary to your adversaries. **<sup>23</sup>** For My angel will go before you and bring you to the Amorites and the Hittites and the Perizzites and the Canaanites and the Hivites and the Jebusites, and I will wipe them out. **<sup>24</sup>** You shall not bow down to their gods nor serve them, nor do as they do. Rather, you shall completely overthrow them and break their sacred pillars in pieces.

**<sup>25</sup>** You shall serve the LORD your God, and He will bless your bread and your water. And I will remove sickness from among you. **<sup>26</sup>** None shall miscarry or be barren in your land; I will fulfill the number of your days. **<sup>27</sup>** I will send My terror before you and will throw into confusion all the people against whom you come, and I will make all your enemies turn their backs to you. **<sup>28</sup>** And I will send the hornet before you, and it shall drive out the Hivites, the Canaanites, and the Hittites from before you. **<sup>29</sup>** I will not drive them out before you in one year, lest the land become desolate and the wild beasts multiply against you. **<sup>30</sup>** Little by little I will drive them out from before you, until you have increased and possessed the land.

**<sup>31</sup>** And I will set your border from the Red Sea to the Sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness to the River, for I will give the inhabitants of the land into your hand, and you shall drive them out from before you. **<sup>32</sup>** You shall make no covenant with them or with their gods. **<sup>33</sup>** They shall not dwell in your land, lest they make you sin against Me. For if you serve their gods, it will surely be a snare to you. 

## Chapter 24

**<sup>1</sup>** And He said to Moses, “Go up to the LORD, you and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and you shall worship from a distance. **<sup>2</sup>** And Moses alone shall come near to the LORD, but they shall not come near, and the people shall not go up with him.”

**<sup>3</sup>** So Moses came and recounted to the people all the words of the LORD and all the ordinances, and all the people answered with one voice and said, “All the words which the LORD has spoken we will do.”

**<sup>4</sup>** Then Moses wrote down all the words of the LORD. And he rose early in the morning and built an altar at the foot of the mountain and twelve pillars for the twelve tribes of Israel. **<sup>5</sup>** And he sent young men of the sons of Israel, and they offered burnt offerings and sacrificed bulls as peace offerings to the LORD. **<sup>6</sup>** Then Moses took half of the blood and put it in basins, and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

**<sup>7</sup>** And he took the book of the covenant and read it aloud in the hearing of the people, and they said, “All that the LORD has spoken we will do, and we will obey.” **<sup>8</sup>** So Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and said, “Behold the blood of the covenant which the LORD has made with you concerning all these words.”

**<sup>9</sup>** Then Moses went up with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, **<sup>10</sup>** and they saw the God of Israel. And under His feet there was something like a pavement of sapphire, as clear as the sky itself. **<sup>11</sup>** Yet He did not stretch out His hand against the nobles of the sons of Israel; and they beheld God, and they ate and drank.

**<sup>12</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Come up to Me on the mountain and remain there, and I will give you the tablets of stone and the law and the commandment which I have written for their instruction.” **<sup>13</sup>** So Moses arose with Joshua his servant, and Moses went up onto the mountain of God.

**<sup>14</sup>** And he said to the elders, “Wait here for us until we return to you. And behold, Aaron and Hur are with you; whoever has a matter, let him go to them.” **<sup>15</sup>** Then Moses went up on the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain.

**<sup>16</sup>** And the glory of the LORD settled on Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it for six days. And on the seventh day He called to Moses from the midst of the cloud. **<sup>17</sup>** And the appearance of the glory of the LORD was like a consuming fire on the top of the mountain in the eyes of the sons of Israel. **<sup>18</sup>** So Moses entered the cloud and went up on the mountain. And Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights. 

## Chapter 25

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, that they may take for Me a contribution. From every man whose heart moves him you shall take My contribution.

**<sup>3</sup>** And this is the contribution that you shall take from them: gold and silver and bronze, **<sup>4</sup>** blue and purple and scarlet yarn, fine linen and goats’ hair, **<sup>5</sup>** tanned rams’ skins, dolphin skins, and acacia wood, **<sup>6</sup>** oil for the lamp, spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense, **<sup>7</sup>** onyx stones and stones to be set in the ephod and in the breastpiece.

**<sup>8</sup>** And let them make for Me a sanctuary, that I may dwell in their midst. **<sup>9</sup>** According to all that I am going to show you—the pattern of the tabernacle and the pattern of all its furnishings—just so you shall make it.

**<sup>10</sup>** They shall make an ark of acacia wood, two and a half cubits long and one and a half cubits wide and one and a half cubits high. **<sup>11</sup>** You shall overlay it with pure gold—inside and out you shall overlay it—and you shall make a gold molding around it. **<sup>12</sup>** You shall cast four rings of gold for it and put them on its four feet, two rings on the one side of it and two rings on the other side. **<sup>13</sup>** You shall make poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold. **<sup>14</sup>** You shall put the poles into the rings on the sides of the ark, to carry the ark by them. **<sup>15</sup>** The poles shall remain in the rings of the ark; they shall not be removed from it. **<sup>16</sup>** You shall put into the ark the testimony that I shall give you.

**<sup>17</sup>** You shall make a mercy seat of pure gold, two and a half cubits long and one and a half cubits wide. **<sup>18</sup>** You shall make two cherubim of gold; of hammered work you shall make them at the two ends of the mercy seat. **<sup>19</sup>** Make one cherub at one end and one cherub at the other end. From the mercy seat you shall make the cherubim on its two ends. **<sup>20</sup>** The cherubim shall spread out their wings above, covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shall face one another; the faces of the cherubim shall be toward the mercy seat. **<sup>21</sup>** You shall put the mercy seat on top of the ark, and in the ark you shall put the testimony that I shall give you. **<sup>22</sup>** There I will meet with you, and I will speak with you from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubim that are on the ark of the testimony, about all that I shall command you concerning the sons of Israel.

**<sup>23</sup>** You shall make a table of acacia wood, two cubits long and one cubit wide and one and a half cubits high. **<sup>24</sup>** You shall overlay it with pure gold and make a gold molding around it. **<sup>25</sup>** You shall make a rim around it, a handbreadth wide, and a gold molding around the rim. **<sup>26</sup>** You shall make four rings of gold for it and fasten the rings to the four corners at its four legs. **<sup>27</sup>** The rings shall be close to the rim as holders for the poles to carry the table. **<sup>28</sup>** You shall make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold, and the table shall be carried with them. **<sup>29</sup>** You shall make its plates and its dishes, its jars and its bowls with which to pour drink offerings; you shall make them of pure gold. **<sup>30</sup>** You shall set the bread of the Presence on the table before Me regularly.

**<sup>31</sup>** You shall make a lampstand of pure gold. The lampstand shall be made of hammered work—its base and its stem, its cups, its calyxes, and its blossoms shall be of one piece with it. **<sup>32</sup>** Six branches shall go out from its sides: three branches of the lampstand out from one side and three branches of the lampstand out from the other side. **<sup>33</sup>** Three cups shaped like almond blossoms, each with calyx and blossom, shall be on one branch, and three cups shaped like almond blossoms on the other branch—the same for the six branches going out from the lampstand. **<sup>34</sup>** And on the lampstand itself there shall be four cups shaped like almond blossoms, with calyxes and blossoms, **<sup>35</sup>** and a calyx under the first pair of branches from it, and a calyx under the second pair of branches from it, and a calyx under the third pair of branches from it—for the six branches going out from the lampstand. **<sup>36</sup>** Their calyxes and their branches shall be of one piece with it, all of it a single hammered work of pure gold. **<sup>37</sup>** You shall make its seven lamps, and the lamps shall be set up so as to give light in front of it. **<sup>38</sup>** Its tongs and its trays shall be of pure gold. **<sup>39</sup>** It shall be made from a talent of pure gold, with all these utensils. **<sup>40</sup>** See that you make them according to the pattern shown to you on the mountain. 

## Chapter 26

**<sup>1</sup>** Moreover, you shall make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine linen twisted, and blue and purple and scarlet yarns; you shall make them with cherubim skillfully worked into them. **<sup>2</sup>** The length of each curtain shall be twenty-eight cubits, and the width of each curtain four cubits; all the curtains shall have the same measurement. **<sup>3</sup>** Five curtains shall be joined to one another, and the other five curtains shall be joined to one another. **<sup>4</sup>** And you shall make loops of blue on the edge of the end curtain in the first set, and likewise you shall make them on the edge of the end curtain in the second set. **<sup>5</sup>** You shall make fifty loops on the one curtain, and fifty loops you shall make on the edge of the curtain that is in the second set; the loops shall be opposite one another. **<sup>6</sup>** And you shall make fifty clasps of gold, and join the curtains to one another with the clasps, so that the tabernacle may become one whole. **<sup>7</sup>** And you shall make curtains of goats’ hair for a tent over the tabernacle; eleven curtains shall you make. **<sup>8</sup>** The length of each curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the width of each curtain four cubits; the eleven curtains shall have the same measurement. **<sup>9</sup>** And you shall join five curtains by themselves, and the six curtains by themselves, and double over the sixth curtain at the front of the tent. **<sup>10</sup>** And you shall make fifty loops on the edge of the one end curtain in the first set, and fifty loops on the edge of the end curtain that joins the second. **<sup>11</sup>** And you shall make fifty clasps of bronze, and put the clasps into the loops, and join the tent together so that it becomes one. **<sup>12</sup>** And the excess that remains of the curtains of the tent—the half curtain that is left over—shall hang over the back of the tabernacle. **<sup>13</sup>** And the cubit on the one side and the cubit on the other side of what remains in the length of the curtains of the tent shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle, on both sides, to cover it.

**<sup>14</sup>** And you shall make a covering for the tent of tanned rams’ skins and a covering of fine leather above.

**<sup>15</sup>** And you shall make the boards for the tabernacle of acacia wood, standing upright. **<sup>16</sup>** Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half shall be the width of each board. **<sup>17</sup>** Each board shall have two tenons, joined to one another; thus shall you do for all the boards of the tabernacle. **<sup>18</sup>** And you shall make the boards for the tabernacle: twenty boards for the south side facing southward. **<sup>19</sup>** And you shall make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards—two sockets under one board for its two tenons, and two sockets under another board for its two tenons. **<sup>20</sup>** And for the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, twenty boards **<sup>21</sup>** and their forty sockets of silver—two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. **<sup>22</sup>** And for the rear of the tabernacle westward you shall make six boards. **<sup>23</sup>** And you shall make two boards for the corners of the tabernacle at the rear. **<sup>24</sup>** And they shall be doubled at the bottom, and together they shall be complete at the top to the first ring; thus shall it be with both of them—they shall form the two corners. **<sup>25</sup>** And there shall be eight boards, with their sockets of silver—sixteen sockets—two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. **<sup>26</sup>** And you shall make bars of acacia wood: five for the boards on the one side of the tabernacle, **<sup>27</sup>** and five bars for the boards on the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards on the rear side of the tabernacle westward. **<sup>28</sup>** And the middle bar in the center of the boards shall pass through from end to end. **<sup>29</sup>** And you shall overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for holders for the bars, and you shall overlay the bars with gold.

**<sup>30</sup>** And you shall erect the tabernacle according to the plan that you were shown on the mountain.

**<sup>31</sup>** And you shall make a veil of blue and purple and scarlet yarns, and fine twisted linen; it shall be made with cherubim skillfully worked. **<sup>32</sup>** And you shall hang it on four pillars of acacia overlaid with gold, with hooks of gold, on four sockets of silver. **<sup>33</sup>** And you shall hang the veil under the clasps, and bring in there, behind the veil, the ark of the testimony; and the veil shall separate for you between the Holy Place and the Most Holy. **<sup>34</sup>** And you shall put the mercy seat on the ark of the testimony in the Most Holy Place. **<sup>35</sup>** And you shall set the table outside the veil, and the lampstand opposite the table on the south side of the tabernacle; and you shall place the table on the north side. **<sup>36</sup>** And you shall make a screen for the entrance of the tent, of blue and purple and scarlet yarns, and fine twisted linen, the work of an embroiderer. **<sup>37</sup>** And you shall make for the screen five pillars of acacia, and overlay them with gold, their hooks shall be of gold, and you shall cast five sockets of bronze for them. 

## Chapter 27

**<sup>1</sup>** You shall make the altar of acacia wood, five cubits long and five cubits wide—the altar shall be square—and its height shall be three cubits. **<sup>2</sup>** And you shall make horns on its four corners; its horns shall be of one piece with it, and you shall overlay it with bronze. **<sup>3</sup>** And you shall make its pots to remove its ashes, and its shovels, and its basins, and its forks, and its firepans—you shall make all its utensils of bronze. **<sup>4</sup>** And you shall make for it a networked grating, a bronze mesh, and on the mesh you shall make four bronze rings at its four corners. **<sup>5</sup>** And you shall set it beneath the ledge of the altar, from below, so that the mesh reaches halfway up the altar. **<sup>6</sup>** And you shall make poles for the altar, poles of acacia wood, and overlay them with bronze. **<sup>7</sup>** And its poles shall be put into the rings, and the poles shall be on the two sides of the altar when it is carried. **<sup>8</sup>** You shall make it hollow with boards; they shall make it as it was shown to you on the mountain.

**<sup>9</sup>** And you shall make the court of the tabernacle. On the south side, the court shall have hangings of fine linen, one hundred cubits in length for the one side, **<sup>10</sup>** and its twenty pillars and their twenty sockets shall be of bronze; the hooks of the pillars and their bands shall be of silver. **<sup>11</sup>** And likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings one hundred cubits long, and its twenty pillars and their twenty sockets shall be of bronze; the hooks of the pillars and their bands shall be of silver. **<sup>12</sup>** And for the width of the court on the west side there shall be hangings fifty cubits, with their ten pillars and their ten sockets. **<sup>13</sup>** And the width of the court on the front, to the east, shall be fifty cubits. **<sup>14</sup>** The hangings on one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits, with their three pillars and their three sockets. **<sup>15</sup>** And on the second side there shall be hangings of fifteen cubits, with their three pillars and their three sockets. **<sup>16</sup>** And for the gate of the court there shall be a screen of twenty cubits, of blue and purple and scarlet yarns, and fine twisted linen, embroidered with needlework, with four pillars and their four sockets. **<sup>17</sup>** All the pillars of the court around shall be bound with silver, their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets shall be of bronze. **<sup>18</sup>** The length of the court shall be one hundred cubits, and the width fifty throughout, and the height five cubits, of fine twisted linen, and their sockets of bronze. **<sup>19</sup>** All the utensils of the tabernacle in all its service, and all its pegs, and all the pegs of the court, shall be of bronze.

**<sup>20</sup>** And you shall command the sons of Israel that they bring to you pure beaten olive oil for the light, to make the lamp burn continually. **<sup>21</sup>** In the tent of meeting, outside the veil that is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall set it in order, from evening to morning, before the LORD. It shall be a statute forever for their generations, from the sons of Israel. 

## Chapter 28

**<sup>1</sup>** And you shall bring near to you Aaron your brother, and his sons with him, from among the sons of Israel, to serve Me as priest—Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron. **<sup>2</sup>** And you shall make holy garments for Aaron your brother, for glory and for beauty.

**<sup>3</sup>** And you shall speak to all the skilled men, whom I have filled with a spirit of wisdom, and they shall make the garments of Aaron, to consecrate him, that he may serve Me as priest. **<sup>4</sup>** These are the garments that they shall make: a breastpiece, an ephod, a robe, a tunic of checker work, a turban, and a sash. And they shall make holy garments for Aaron your brother and for his sons, to serve Me as priests. **<sup>5</sup>** They shall take the gold, and the blue, and the purple, and the scarlet yarn, and the fine linen. **<sup>6</sup>** And they shall make the ephod of gold, blue, purple, scarlet yarn, and fine twined linen, skillfully worked. **<sup>7</sup>** It shall have two shoulder pieces joined to its two edges, and it shall be joined together. **<sup>8</sup>** And the skillfully woven waistband of the ephod that is on it shall be of the same workmanship, of one piece with it: of gold, blue, purple, scarlet yarn, and fine twined linen. **<sup>9</sup>** And you shall take two onyx stones, and engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel, **<sup>10</sup>** six of their names on the one stone, and the remaining six names on the other stone, in the order of their birth. **<sup>11</sup>** As a gem-cutter engraves signets, so you shall engrave the two stones with the names of the sons of Israel; you shall enclose them in settings of gold filigree. **<sup>12</sup>** And you shall set the two stones on the shoulder pieces of the ephod as stones of remembrance for the sons of Israel. And Aaron shall bear their names before the LORD on his two shoulders for remembrance. **<sup>13</sup>** And you shall make settings of gold filigree, **<sup>14</sup>** and two chains of pure gold, twisted like cords, and you shall attach the corded chains to the settings.

**<sup>15</sup>** And you shall make a breastpiece of judgment, skillfully worked; like the work of the ephod you shall make it: of gold, blue, purple, scarlet yarn, and fine twined linen you shall make it. **<sup>16</sup>** It shall be square and doubled, a span in length and a span in width. **<sup>17</sup>** And you shall set in it settings of stones, four rows of stones: a row of sardius, topaz, and emerald shall be the first row; **<sup>18</sup>** and the second row a turquoise, a sapphire, and a diamond; **<sup>19</sup>** and the third row a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; **<sup>20</sup>** and the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper; they shall be enclosed in gold filigree in their settings. **<sup>21</sup>** And the stones shall be with the names of the sons of Israel, twelve, according to their names. They shall be like signets, each engraved with its name, for the twelve tribes. **<sup>22</sup>** And you shall make for the breastpiece twisted chains like cords, of pure gold. **<sup>23</sup>** And you shall make for the breastpiece two rings of gold, and put the two rings on the two ends of the breastpiece. **<sup>24</sup>** And you shall put the two cords of gold in the two rings at the ends of the breastpiece. **<sup>25</sup>** And the other two ends of the two cords you shall fasten to the two settings, and put them on the shoulder pieces of the ephod at the front of it. **<sup>26</sup>** And you shall make two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of the breastpiece, on its inner edge, which is toward the ephod. **<sup>27</sup>** And you shall make two rings of gold, and attach them to the front of the ephod, low on the two shoulder pieces, close to the place where it is joined, above the skillfully woven waistband of the ephod. **<sup>28</sup>** And they shall bind the breastpiece by its rings to the rings of the ephod with a cord of blue, so that it may lie on the skillfully woven waistband of the ephod, and the breastpiece shall not come loose from the ephod. **<sup>29</sup>** And Aaron shall bear the names of the sons of Israel in the breastpiece of judgment on his heart, when he goes into the holy place, for a remembrance before the LORD continually. **<sup>30</sup>** And you shall put into the breastpiece of judgment the Urim and the Thummim, and they shall be on Aaron’s heart, when he goes in before the LORD. And Aaron shall bear the judgment of the sons of Israel on his heart before the LORD continually.

**<sup>31</sup>** And you shall make the robe of the ephod entirely of blue. **<sup>32</sup>** It shall have an opening for the head in the middle of it; around its opening there shall be a binding, a woven work like the opening of a garment, so that it does not tear. **<sup>33</sup>** And on its hem you shall make pomegranates of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, all around its hem, with bells of gold between them all around: **<sup>34</sup>** a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, on the hem of the robe all around. **<sup>35</sup>** And it shall be on Aaron when he ministers, and its sound shall be heard when he goes into the holy place before the LORD and when he comes out, so that he does not die.

**<sup>36</sup>** And you shall make a plate of pure gold, and engrave on it, like the engraving of a signet, “Holy to the LORD.” **<sup>37</sup>** And you shall fasten it on a blue cord, and it shall be on the turban; it shall be at the front of the turban. **<sup>38</sup>** And it shall be on Aaron’s forehead, and Aaron shall bear the guilt of the holy things, which the sons of Israel consecrate, all their holy gifts; and it shall be always on his forehead, to accept them before the LORD.

**<sup>39</sup>** And you shall weave the tunic of fine linen, and you shall make a turban of fine linen, and you shall make a sash, the work of an embroiderer.

**<sup>40</sup>** And for Aaron’s sons you shall make tunics, and you shall make sashes for them, and turbans for them, for glory and for beauty.

**<sup>41</sup>** And you shall clothe them—Aaron your brother and his sons with him—and anoint them and ordain them and consecrate them, so that they may serve Me as priests.

**<sup>42</sup>** And you shall make for them linen undergarments to cover their naked flesh; they shall reach from the loins to the thighs. **<sup>43</sup>** And they shall be on Aaron and on his sons when they go into the tent of meeting or when they come near to the altar to minister in the holy place, so that they do not incur guilt and die. This shall be a statute forever for him and for his seed after him. 

## Chapter 29

**<sup>1</sup>** And this is what you shall do to them to consecrate them, to minister as priests to Me: Take one young bull and two rams without blemish, **<sup>2</sup>** and unleavened bread and unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil—you shall make them of fine wheat flour. **<sup>3</sup>** And you shall put them in one basket, and bring them in the basket, and bring the bull and the two rams. **<sup>4</sup>** Then you shall bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance of the tent of meeting, and wash them with water. **<sup>5</sup>** And you shall take the garments, and clothe Aaron with the tunic and the robe of the ephod and the ephod and the breastpiece, and gird him with the skillfully woven sash of the ephod. **<sup>6</sup>** And you shall set the turban on his head, and put the holy crown on the turban. **<sup>7</sup>** Then you shall take the anointing oil and pour it on his head and anoint him. **<sup>8</sup>** And you shall bring his sons and clothe them with tunics. **<sup>9</sup>** And you shall gird them with sashes, Aaron and his sons, and bind headdresses on them, and the priesthood shall be theirs by a perpetual statute. Thus you shall ordain Aaron and his sons.

**<sup>10</sup>** Then you shall bring the bull before the tent of meeting, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the bull. **<sup>11</sup>** And you shall slaughter the bull before the LORD at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>12</sup>** And you shall take some of the blood of the bull and put it on the horns of the altar with your finger, and you shall pour out all the rest of the blood at the base of the altar. **<sup>13</sup>** And you shall take all the fat that covers the entrails, and the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and offer them up in smoke on the altar. **<sup>14</sup>** But the flesh of the bull and its skin and its dung you shall burn with fire outside the camp; it is a sin offering.

**<sup>15</sup>** Then you shall take one of the rams, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the ram. **<sup>16</sup>** And you shall slaughter the ram and take its blood and sprinkle it all around on the altar. **<sup>17</sup>** Then you shall cut the ram into pieces, and wash its entrails and its legs, and put them with its pieces and with its head. **<sup>18</sup>** And you shall offer up the whole ram in smoke on the altar. It is a burnt offering to the LORD; it is a pleasing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD.

**<sup>19</sup>** Then you shall take the second ram, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the ram. **<sup>20</sup>** And you shall slaughter the ram and take some of its blood and put it on the lobe of Aaron’s right ear and on the lobe of his sons’ right ears, and on the thumbs of their right hands and on the big toes of their right feet, and sprinkle the rest of the blood around on the altar. **<sup>21</sup>** Then you shall take some of the blood that is on the altar and some of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it on Aaron and on his garments and on his sons and on the garments of his sons with him. And he shall be holy, and his garments, and his sons and the garments of his sons with him. **<sup>22</sup>** You shall also take the fat from the ram, and the fat tail and the fat that covers the entrails, and the lobe of the liver and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and the right thigh (for it is a ram of ordination), **<sup>23</sup>** and one loaf of bread and one cake of bread mixed with oil and one wafer from the basket of unleavened bread that is before the LORD. **<sup>24</sup>** And you shall place all these in the hands of Aaron and in the hands of his sons, and wave them as a wave offering before the LORD. **<sup>25</sup>** Then you shall take them from their hands and offer them up in smoke on the altar on top of the burnt offering as a pleasing aroma before the LORD. It is an offering by fire to the LORD.

**<sup>26</sup>** And you shall take the breast of the ram of Aaron’s ordination, and wave it as a wave offering before the LORD, and it shall be your portion. **<sup>27</sup>** And you shall consecrate the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the contribution that is waved and that is contributed from the ram of ordination, from what was Aaron’s and from what was his sons’. **<sup>28</sup>** And it shall be for Aaron and for his sons as a perpetual statute from the sons of Israel, for it is a contribution; and it shall be a contribution from the sons of Israel from their peace offerings, their contribution to the LORD. **<sup>29</sup>** And the holy garments of Aaron shall be for his sons after him, that in them they may be anointed and ordained.

**<sup>30</sup>** For seven days the one of his sons who is priest in his place shall put them on when he enters the tent of meeting to minister in the holy place. **<sup>31</sup>** And you shall take the ram of ordination and boil its flesh in a holy place. **<sup>32</sup>** And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram and the bread that is in the basket at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>33</sup>** And they shall eat those things by which atonement was made at their ordination and consecration; but a stranger shall not eat them, because they are holy. **<sup>34</sup>** And if any of the flesh of ordination or any of the bread remains until morning, you shall burn the remainder with fire. It shall not be eaten, because it is holy. **<sup>35</sup>** Thus you shall do to Aaron and to his sons, according to all that I have commanded you; you shall ordain them for seven days. **<sup>36</sup>** And each day you shall offer a bull as a sin offering for atonement, and you shall purify the altar when you make atonement for it, and you shall anoint it to consecrate it. **<sup>37</sup>** For seven days you shall make atonement for the altar and consecrate it. Then the altar shall be most holy, and whatever touches the altar shall be holy.

**<sup>38</sup>** Now this is what you shall offer on the altar: two one-year-old lambs each day, regularly. **<sup>39</sup>** You shall offer one lamb in the morning and the other lamb you shall offer at twilight. **<sup>40</sup>** And with the first lamb, a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with a fourth of a hin of beaten oil, and a fourth of a hin of wine as a drink offering. **<sup>41</sup>** And the other lamb you shall offer at twilight, and shall offer with it the same grain offering and the same drink offering as in the morning, as a pleasing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD. **<sup>42</sup>** It shall be a regular burnt offering throughout your generations at the entrance of the tent of meeting before the LORD, where I will meet with you, to speak to you there. **<sup>43</sup>** And there I will meet with the sons of Israel, and it shall be sanctified by My glory. **<sup>44</sup>** And I will sanctify the tent of meeting and the altar. I will also sanctify Aaron and his sons to serve as priests to Me. **<sup>45</sup>** And I will dwell among the sons of Israel and will be their God. **<sup>46</sup>** And they shall know that I am the LORD their God, who brought them out of the land of Egypt that I might dwell among them. I am the LORD their God. 

## Chapter 30

**<sup>1</sup>** You shall make an altar for burning incense; you shall make it of acacia wood. **<sup>2</sup>** A cubit in length and a cubit in width—it shall be square—and two cubits high; its horns shall be of one piece with it. **<sup>3</sup>** You shall overlay it with pure gold, its top and its sides all around, and its horns; and you shall make a gold molding all around it. **<sup>4</sup>** And you shall make two gold rings for it under its molding, on its two opposite sides you shall make them, and they shall serve as holders for poles with which to carry it. **<sup>5</sup>** You shall make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold. **<sup>6</sup>** And you shall set it in front of the veil that is by the ark of the testimony, in front of the atonement cover that is over the testimony, where I will meet with you. **<sup>7</sup>** And Aaron shall burn fragrant incense on it; morning by morning, when he trims the lamps, he shall burn it.

**<sup>8</sup>** And when Aaron sets up the lamps at twilight, he shall burn it—a continual incense before the LORD throughout your generations. **<sup>9</sup>** You shall not offer strange incense on it, or a burnt offering or a grain offering; and you shall not pour out a drink offering on it. **<sup>10</sup>** And Aaron shall make atonement on its horns once a year; with the blood of the sin offering of atonement, once a year he shall make atonement for it throughout your generations. It is most holy to the LORD.

**<sup>11</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>12</sup>** When you take a census of the sons of Israel to number them, each man shall give a ransom for his soul to the LORD when you number them, so that there will be no plague among them when you number them. **<sup>13</sup>** This they shall give, everyone who passes among those who are counted: half a shekel according to the shekel of the sanctuary (the shekel is twenty gerahs), half a shekel as a contribution to the LORD. **<sup>14</sup>** Everyone who passes among those who are counted, from twenty years old and upward, shall give the contribution to the LORD. **<sup>15</sup>** The rich shall not give more and the poor shall not give less than the half shekel, when you give the contribution to the LORD to make atonement for your souls. **<sup>16</sup>** And you shall take the atonement money from the sons of Israel and shall give it for the service of the tent of meeting, so that it may be a memorial for the sons of Israel before the LORD, to make atonement for your souls.

**<sup>17</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>18</sup>** You shall make a basin of bronze, with its stand of bronze, for washing; and you shall place it between the tent of meeting and the altar, and you shall put water in it. **<sup>19</sup>** And Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet from it. **<sup>20</sup>** When they go into the tent of meeting, they shall wash with water, so that they do not die; or when they approach the altar to minister, to burn an offering by fire to the LORD, **<sup>21</sup>** they shall wash their hands and their feet, so that they do not die. And it shall be a perpetual statute for them, for him and for his seed throughout their generations.

**<sup>22</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>23</sup>** Take for yourself the finest spices: flowing myrrh five hundred shekels, and fragrant cinnamon half that amount, two hundred fifty, and fragrant cane two hundred fifty, **<sup>24</sup>** and cassia five hundred, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, and a hin of olive oil. **<sup>25</sup>** And you shall make from it a sacred anointing oil, a perfumed blend, the work of a perfumer; it shall be a holy anointing oil. **<sup>26</sup>** And you shall anoint with it the tent of meeting and the ark of the testimony, **<sup>27</sup>** and the table and all its vessels, and the lampstand and its utensils, and the altar of incense, **<sup>28</sup>** and the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils, and the basin and its stand. **<sup>29</sup>** And you shall consecrate them, so that they shall be most holy; whatever touches them shall be holy. **<sup>30</sup>** And you shall anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, so that they may serve Me as priests.

**<sup>31</sup>** And you shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, This shall be a holy anointing oil to Me throughout your generations. **<sup>32</sup>** It shall not be poured on the body of an ordinary man, and you shall not make anything like it with the same formulation; it is holy, and it shall be holy to you. **<sup>33</sup>** Whoever makes any like it or puts any of it on a stranger shall be cut off from his people. **<sup>34</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, Take spices: stacte and onycha and galbanum—spices with pure frankincense—of equal amounts they shall be. **<sup>35</sup>** And you shall make them into incense, a compound blended by a perfumer, salted, pure, and holy. **<sup>36</sup>** And you shall beat some of it very fine, and put part of it before the testimony in the tent of meeting, where I will meet with you; it shall be most holy to you. **<sup>37</sup>** And the incense which you make, you shall not make for yourselves using its formulation; it shall be holy to you for the LORD. **<sup>38</sup>** Whoever makes any like it, to smell it, shall be cut off from his people. 

## Chapter 31

**<sup>1</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “See, I have called by name Bezalel son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. **<sup>3</sup>** And I have filled him with the Spirit of God, with wisdom, and with understanding, and with knowledge, and with all manner of craftsmanship, **<sup>4</sup>** to devise skillful works—to work in gold, and in silver, and in bronze, **<sup>5</sup>** and in the cutting of stones for setting, and in carving wood—to work in all craftsmanship.

**<sup>6</sup>** And behold, I have appointed with him Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan. And in the heart of every wise-hearted man I have placed wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded you: **<sup>7</sup>** the tent of meeting, and the ark of the testimony, and the atonement cover that is on it, and all the furnishings of the tent, **<sup>8</sup>** and the table and its utensils, and the pure lampstand with all its utensils, and the altar of incense, **<sup>9</sup>** and the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils, and the basin and its stand, **<sup>10</sup>** and the woven garments, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons for ministering as priests, **<sup>11</sup>** and the anointing oil, and the fragrant incense for the sanctuary. They shall make them according to all that I have commanded you.

**<sup>12</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, **<sup>13</sup>** “You shall speak also to the sons of Israel, saying, ‘Surely you shall keep My sabbaths, for it is a sign between Me and you throughout your generations, that you may know that I am the LORD who sanctifies you. **<sup>14</sup>** Therefore you shall keep the sabbath, for it is holy to you. Everyone who profanes it shall surely be put to death; for whoever does any work on it, that soul shall be cut off from among his people. **<sup>15</sup>** Six days work may be done, but on the seventh day is a sabbath of complete rest, holy to the LORD. Whoever does any work on the sabbath day shall surely be put to death. **<sup>16</sup>** Therefore the sons of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations as a covenant forever. **<sup>17</sup>** It is a sign between Me and the sons of Israel forever; for in six days the LORD made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day He ceased and was refreshed.’” **<sup>18</sup>** And He gave to Moses, when He had finished speaking with him on Mount Sinai, the two tablets of the testimony, tablets of stone, written with the finger of God. 

## Chapter 32

**<sup>1</sup>** When the people saw that Moses delayed coming down from the mountain, the people gathered around Aaron and said to him, “Arise, make for us gods who shall go before us. For this Moses, the man who brought us up from the land of Egypt—we do not know what has become of him.”

**<sup>2</sup>** Then Aaron said to them, “Take off the gold rings that are in the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters, and bring them to me.”

**<sup>3</sup>** So all the people took off the gold rings that were in their ears and brought them to Aaron. **<sup>4</sup>** He took them from their hand, fashioned it with a tool, and made it into a molten calf. Then they said, “These are your gods, O Israel, who brought you up from the land of Egypt.” **<sup>5</sup>** When Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it. Then Aaron called out and said, “Tomorrow shall be a feast to the LORD.” **<sup>6</sup>** So they rose early the next day and offered burnt offerings and brought peace offerings. And the people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to revel.

**<sup>7</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go down, for your people, whom you brought up from the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves. **<sup>8</sup>** They have turned aside quickly from the way that I commanded them. They have made for themselves a molten calf, have bowed down to it and sacrificed to it, and said, ‘These are your gods, O Israel, who brought you up from the land of Egypt.’”

**<sup>9</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “I have seen this people, and behold, it is a stiff-necked people. **<sup>10</sup>** Now therefore let Me alone, that My wrath may burn hot against them and that I may consume them. But of you I will make a great nation.”

**<sup>11</sup>** But Moses implored the LORD his God and said, “O LORD, why does Your wrath burn hot against Your people, whom You brought out from the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand? **<sup>12</sup>** Why should the Egyptians say, ‘With evil intent He brought them out, to kill them in the mountains and to consume them from the face of the earth’? Turn from Your fierce wrath and relent from the harm against Your people. **<sup>13</sup>** Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, Your servants, to whom You swore by Yourself and said to them, ‘I will multiply your offspring like the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of I will give to your offspring, and they shall inherit it forever.’”

**<sup>14</sup>** Then the LORD relented from the harm that He said He would do to His people. **<sup>15</sup>** Then Moses turned and went down from the mountain with the two tablets of the testimony in his hand, tablets written on both sides—on one side and on the other they were written. **<sup>16</sup>** The tablets were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, engraved on the tablets.

**<sup>17</sup>** When Joshua heard the sound of the people as they shouted, he said to Moses, “There is a sound of war in the camp.” **<sup>18</sup>** But he said, “It is not the sound of shouting for victory, nor the sound of crying for defeat, but the sound of singing that I hear.” **<sup>19</sup>** And it came to pass, as soon as he came near the camp and saw the calf and the dancing, that Moses’ anger burned hot, and he threw the tablets from his hands and shattered them at the foot of the mountain.

**<sup>20</sup>** Then he took the calf they had made and burned it with fire, ground it to powder, scattered it upon the water, and made the sons of Israel drink it.

**<sup>21</sup>** Then Moses said to Aaron, “What did this people do to you, that you brought upon them such a great sin?”

**<sup>22</sup>** And Aaron said, “Do not let the anger of my lord burn hot. You know the people—that they are bent on evil. **<sup>23</sup>** They said to me, ‘Make for us gods who shall go before us, for this Moses, the man who brought us up from the land of Egypt—we do not know what has become of him.’

**<sup>24</sup>** So I said to them, ‘Whoever has gold, take it off.’ Then they gave it to me, and I threw it into the fire, and out came this calf.”

**<sup>25</sup>** When Moses saw that the people were out of control—for Aaron had let them get out of control, to become a derision among their enemies— **<sup>26</sup>** Moses stood at the gate of the camp and said, “Whoever is for the LORD, come to me!” Then all the sons of Levi gathered to him. **<sup>27</sup>** And he said to them, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Every man put his sword on his side, and go back and forth from gate to gate throughout the camp, and every man kill his brother, and every man his friend, and every man his neighbor.”

**<sup>28</sup>** So the sons of Levi did according to the word of Moses. And that day about three thousand men of the people fell. **<sup>29</sup>** And Moses said, “Today you have been ordained to the LORD, each man at the cost of his son and of his brother, so that He may bestow a blessing upon you this day.”

**<sup>30</sup>** And it came to pass the next day that Moses said to the people, “You have committed a great sin. Now I will go up to the LORD; perhaps I can make atonement for your sin.”

**<sup>31</sup>** So Moses returned to the LORD and said, “Alas, this people has committed a great sin. They have made for themselves gods of gold. **<sup>32</sup>** Yet now, if You will forgive their sin, then forgive it; but if not, blot me out of Your book that You have written.”

**<sup>33</sup>** But the LORD said to Moses, “Whoever has sinned against Me, I will blot him out of My book. **<sup>34</sup>** But now go, lead the people to the place about which I spoke to you. Behold, My angel shall go before you. Nevertheless, on the day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them.”

**<sup>35</sup>** Then the LORD struck the people with a plague, because they and Aaron had made the calf. 

## Chapter 33

**<sup>1</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, “Go, ascend from here—you and the people whom you brought up from the land of Egypt—to the land which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, ‘I will give it to your seed.’ **<sup>2</sup>** And I will send an angel before you, and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. **<sup>3</sup>** Go up to a land flowing with milk and honey; but I will not go up in your midst, lest I consume you on the way, for you are a stiff-necked people.”

**<sup>4</sup>** When the people heard this harsh word, they mourned, and no man put on his ornaments. **<sup>5</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, “Say to the sons of Israel, ‘You are a stiff-necked people; if for one moment I were to go up in your midst, I would consume you. But now, take off your ornaments from yourselves, that I may know what I will do to you.’”

**<sup>6</sup>** So the sons of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments from Mount Horeb onward. **<sup>7</sup>** Now Moses would take the tent and pitch it for himself outside the camp, far from the camp, and he called it the Tent of Meeting. And everyone who sought the LORD would go out to the Tent of Meeting which was outside the camp. **<sup>8</sup>** And it would happen that when Moses went out to the tent, all the people would rise and stand, each man at the entrance of his tent, and they would look after Moses until he entered the tent. **<sup>9</sup>** And when Moses entered the tent, the pillar of cloud would descend and stand at the entrance of the tent, and the LORD would speak with Moses. **<sup>10</sup>** And all the people would see the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance of the tent, and all the people would rise and bow down, each man at the entrance of his tent. **<sup>11</sup>** And the LORD would speak to Moses face to face, just as a man speaks with his friend. Then he would return to the camp, but his attendant Joshua son of Nun, a young man, did not depart from the tent.

**<sup>12</sup>** And Moses said to the LORD, “See, You say to me, ‘Bring up this people,’ but You have not made known to me whom You will send with me. Yet You have said, ‘I know you by name, and you have found favor in My eyes.’ **<sup>13</sup>** Now therefore, if I have indeed found favor in Your eyes, please make known to me Your ways, that I may know You, in order that I may find favor in Your eyes. And consider also that this nation is Your people.” **<sup>14</sup>** And He said, “My presence will go, and I will give you rest.” **<sup>15</sup>** And he said to Him, “If Your presence does not go, do not bring us up from here. **<sup>16</sup>** For how then will it be known that I have found favor in Your eyes—I and Your people—unless You go with us? Then we will be distinct—I and Your people—from every other people who is on the face of the earth.” **<sup>17</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, “Also this thing that you have spoken I will do, for you have found favor in My eyes, and I know you by name.”

**<sup>18</sup>** Then he said, “Please show me Your glory.”

**<sup>19</sup>** And He said, “I will cause all My goodness to pass before you, and I will proclaim the name of the LORD before you; and I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show compassion on whom I will show compassion.” **<sup>20</sup>** But He said, “You cannot see My face, for no man can see Me and live.” **<sup>21</sup>** And the LORD said, “Look, here is a place close to Me, and you shall stand on the rock. **<sup>22</sup>** And it shall come to pass, while My glory passes by, that I will put you in a cleft of the rock and will cover you with My hand until I have passed by. **<sup>23</sup>** Then I will remove My hand, and you shall see My back; but My face shall not be seen.” 

## Chapter 34

**<sup>1</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, “Cut for yourself two tablets of stone like the first ones, and I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, which you broke. **<sup>2</sup>** Be ready by morning, and come up in the morning to Mount Sinai, and present yourself there to Me on top of the mountain. **<sup>3</sup>** And no man shall come up with you, and no man shall be seen throughout all the mountain. Even the flocks and the herds shall not graze in front of that mountain.”

**<sup>4</sup>** So he cut two tablets of stone like the first ones, and Moses rose early in the morning and went up Mount Sinai, as the LORD had commanded him, and he took in his hand the two tablets of stone. **<sup>5</sup>** And the LORD descended in the cloud and stood with him there, and He called upon the name of the LORD.

**<sup>6</sup>** And the LORD passed before him and proclaimed, “The LORD, the LORD God, compassionate and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in loyalty and truth, **<sup>7</sup>** keeping loyal love to the thousandth generation, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but by no means clearing the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the sons and on the sons of sons, to the third and the fourth generation.” **<sup>8</sup>** And Moses hurried and bowed his head toward the ground and worshiped. **<sup>9</sup>** And he said, “If I have now found favor in Your eyes, O Lord, let the Lord please go in the midst of us, for it is a stiff-necked people. Pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us as Your possession.”

**<sup>10</sup>** And He said, “Behold, I am making a covenant. Before all your people I will do wonders such as have not been created in all the earth nor in any nation, and all the people among whom you are shall see the work of the LORD, for it is an awesome thing that I will do with you. **<sup>11</sup>** Observe what I command you today. Behold, I am driving out from before you the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite. **<sup>12</sup>** Be careful, lest you make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land to which you are going, lest they become a snare in your midst. **<sup>13</sup>** But you shall tear down their altars, and break their pillars, and cut down their Asherim. **<sup>14</sup>** For you shall not bow yourself down to another god, for the LORD — whose name is Jealous — is a jealous God. **<sup>15</sup>** Lest you make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they whore after their gods and sacrifice to their gods, and one invites you and you eat of his sacrifice, **<sup>16</sup>** and you take from their daughters for your sons, and their daughters whore after their gods and make your sons whore after their gods.

**<sup>17</sup>** You shall not make for yourself molten gods.

**<sup>18</sup>** You shall keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread. Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you, at the appointed time in the month of Aviv — for in the month of Aviv you came out of Egypt.

**<sup>19</sup>** Every firstborn male is Mine, even every firstborn of your livestock, whether ox or sheep. **<sup>20</sup>** But the firstborn of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb, and if you do not redeem it, you shall break its neck. Every firstborn of your sons you shall redeem. And no man shall appear before Me empty-handed.

**<sup>21</sup>** Six days you shall work, but on the seventh day you shall rest. In plowing time and in harvest you shall rest.

**<sup>22</sup>** And you shall observe the Feast of Weeks — the firstfruits of wheat harvest — and the Feast of Ingathering at the turn of the year. **<sup>23</sup>** Three times in the year all your males shall appear before the Lord GOD, the God of Israel. **<sup>24</sup>** For I will dispossess nations before you and enlarge your borders, and no man shall covet your land when you go up to appear before the LORD your God three times in the year.

**<sup>25</sup>** You shall not offer the blood of My sacrifice with anything leavened, and the sacrifice of the Feast of Passover shall not remain until morning. **<sup>26</sup>** The first of the firstfruits of your ground you shall bring to the house of the LORD your God. You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk. **<sup>27</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, “Write these words, for in accordance with these words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel.” **<sup>28</sup>** So he was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights; he ate no bread and drank no water. And He wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant — the Ten Words. **<sup>29</sup>** And it came to pass, when Moses came down from Mount Sinai — with the two tablets of the testimony in Moses’ hand as he came down from the mountain — that Moses did not know that the skin of his face shone because he had spoken with Him. **<sup>30</sup>** And when Aaron and all the sons of Israel saw Moses, they saw that the skin of his face shone, and they were afraid to come near him. **<sup>31</sup>** But Moses called to them, and Aaron and all the leaders of the congregation returned to him, and Moses spoke to them. **<sup>32</sup>** And afterward all the sons of Israel came near, and he commanded them all that the LORD had spoken with him on Mount Sinai. **<sup>33</sup>** And when Moses had finished speaking with them, he put a veil over his face. **<sup>34</sup>** But whenever Moses went in before the LORD to speak with Him, he would remove the veil until he came out. And when he came out and told the sons of Israel what had been commanded, **<sup>35</sup>** the sons of Israel would see the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses’ face shone. And Moses would put the veil back over his face until he went in to speak with Him. 

## Chapter 35

**<sup>1</sup>** Moses assembled all the congregation of the sons of Israel and said to them, “These are the things that the LORD has commanded, to do them. **<sup>2</sup>** Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day you shall have a sabbath of complete rest, holy to the LORD; whoever does any work on it shall be put to death. **<sup>3</sup>** You shall not kindle a fire in any of your dwellings on the sabbath day.”

**<sup>4</sup>** And Moses spoke to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, saying, “This is the thing that the LORD has commanded, saying, **<sup>5</sup>** ‘Take from among you a contribution to the LORD. Whoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it as the LORD’s contribution: gold, silver, and bronze, **<sup>6</sup>** and blue and purple and scarlet yarn, fine linen and goats’ hair, **<sup>7</sup>** and rams’ skins dyed red, and hides of sea cows, and acacia wood, **<sup>8</sup>** and oil for the light, and spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense, **<sup>9</sup>** and onyx stones and stones for setting, for the ephod and for the breastpiece.’

**<sup>10</sup>** “And let every wise-hearted man among you come and make all that the LORD has commanded: **<sup>11</sup>** the tabernacle, its tent and its covering, its clasps, its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its bases; **<sup>12</sup>** the ark and its poles, the mercy seat, and the veil of the screen; **<sup>13</sup>** the table and its poles, and all its utensils, and the bread of the Presence; **<sup>14</sup>** and the lampstand also for the light, with its utensils and its lamps, and the oil for the light; **<sup>15</sup>** and the altar of incense and its poles, and the anointing oil and the fragrant incense, and the screen for the entrance at the door of the tabernacle; **<sup>16</sup>** the altar of burnt offering, with its bronze grating, its poles, and all its utensils, the basin and its stand; **<sup>17</sup>** the hangings of the court, its pillars and its bases, and the screen for the gate of the court; **<sup>18</sup>** the pegs of the tabernacle and the pegs of the court, and their cords; **<sup>19</sup>** the woven garments for ministering in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to serve as priests.”

**<sup>20</sup>** Then all the congregation of the sons of Israel departed from before Moses. **<sup>21</sup>** And every man whose heart stirred him and every one whose spirit made him willing brought the LORD’s contribution for the work of the tent of meeting, and for all its service, and for the holy garments. **<sup>22</sup>** And they came, both men and women, all who were willing of heart, brought brooches and earrings and signet rings and necklaces, all kinds of gold jewelry — every man who offered a wave offering of gold to the LORD. **<sup>23</sup>** And every man who had blue or purple or scarlet yarn, or fine linen, or goats’ hair, or rams’ skins dyed red, or hides of sea otters, brought them. **<sup>24</sup>** Everyone who could make a contribution of silver or bronze brought it as the LORD’s contribution, and everyone who had acacia wood for any of the work of the service brought it. **<sup>25</sup>** And every wise-hearted woman spun with her hands, and brought what she had spun, blue and purple and scarlet yarn, and fine linen. **<sup>26</sup>** And all the women whose hearts stirred them in wisdom spun the goats’ hair. **<sup>27</sup>** And the leaders brought onyx stones and stones for setting, for the ephod and for the breastpiece, **<sup>28</sup>** and the spices and the oil for the light, and for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense. **<sup>29</sup>** Every man and woman whose heart made them willing to bring for all the work which the LORD had commanded to be done by the hand of Moses — the sons of Israel brought a freewill offering to the LORD.

**<sup>30</sup>** Then Moses said to the sons of Israel, “See, the LORD has called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. **<sup>31</sup>** And He has filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all kinds of craftsmanship, **<sup>32</sup>** to devise artistic designs, to work in gold and silver and bronze, **<sup>33</sup>** and in the cutting of stones for setting, and in the carving of wood, to work in every kind of artistic craftsmanship. **<sup>34</sup>** And He has put in his heart the ability to teach, both he and Oholiab the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan. **<sup>35</sup>** He has filled them with skill to do every sort of work done by an engraver or by a designer or by an embroiderer in blue and purple and scarlet yarn and fine linen, or by a weaver — as those who do every sort of work and devise artistic designs.” 

## Chapter 36

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Bezalel and Oholiab shall work, and every wise-hearted man in whom the LORD has placed wisdom and understanding, to know how to do all the work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that the LORD has commanded. **<sup>2</sup>** And Moses called Bezalel and Oholiab, and every wise-hearted man in whose heart the LORD had placed wisdom, everyone whose heart stirred him up to approach the work to do it. **<sup>3</sup>** And they took from Moses all the contribution which the sons of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to do it. And they continued bringing to him voluntary gifts every morning. **<sup>4</sup>** And all the wise men who were doing all the work of the sanctuary came, each from the work he was doing, **<sup>5</sup>** and they said to Moses, “The people are bringing more than enough for the service of the work which the LORD commanded to do.” **<sup>6</sup>** So Moses gave a command, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, “Let no man or woman do any more work for the contribution for the sanctuary.” So the people were restrained from bringing. **<sup>7</sup>** For the material they had was sufficient for all the work to do it—even too much.

**<sup>8</sup>** And every wise-hearted man among those doing the work made the tabernacle of ten curtains of fine twisted linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet yarns; with cherubim, the work of a skillful craftsman, he made them. **<sup>9</sup>** The length of each curtain was twenty-eight cubits, and the width four cubits; all the curtains had one measure. **<sup>10</sup>** And he joined five curtains to one another, and the other five curtains he joined to one another. **<sup>11</sup>** And he made loops of blue on the edge of the curtain at the end of the first set; likewise he did on the edge of the end curtain in the second set. **<sup>12</sup>** He made fifty loops on one curtain, and he made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that was in the second set; the loops were opposite one another. **<sup>13</sup>** And he made fifty clasps of gold and joined the curtains one to another with the clasps; so the tabernacle became one.

**<sup>14</sup>** And he made curtains of goats’ hair for a tent over the tabernacle; he made eleven curtains. **<sup>15</sup>** The length of each curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits the width of each curtain; the eleven curtains had one measure. **<sup>16</sup>** And he joined five of the curtains separately and six of the curtains separately. **<sup>17</sup>** And he made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that was at the end of the first set, and he made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain of the second set. **<sup>18</sup>** And he made fifty clasps of bronze to join the tent together, that it might be one.

**<sup>19</sup>** And he made a covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering of fine leather above it.

**<sup>20</sup>** And he made the boards for the tabernacle of acacia wood, standing upright. **<sup>21</sup>** The length of each board was ten cubits, and one and a half cubits the width of each board. **<sup>22</sup>** Each board had two tenons, joined one to another; thus he made for all the boards of the tabernacle. **<sup>23</sup>** And he made the boards for the tabernacle: twenty boards for the south side southward. **<sup>24</sup>** And he made forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards—two sockets under one board for its two tenons, and two sockets under another board for its two tenons. **<sup>25</sup>** And for the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, he made twenty boards **<sup>26</sup>** and their forty sockets of silver—two sockets under one board and two sockets under another board. **<sup>27</sup>** And for the rear of the tabernacle westward he made six boards. **<sup>28</sup>** And he made two boards for the corners of the tabernacle at the rear. **<sup>29</sup>** And they were double beneath and in the same way they were entire to the top, to one ring; thus he did to both of them, for the two corners. **<sup>30</sup>** And there were eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets—two sockets under each board. **<sup>31</sup>** And he made bars of acacia wood: five for the boards on one side of the tabernacle, **<sup>32</sup>** and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle at the rear westward. **<sup>33</sup>** And he made the middle bar to pass through the midst of the boards from end to end. **<sup>34</sup>** And he overlaid the boards with gold, and he made their rings of gold as holders for the bars, and he overlaid the bars with gold.

**<sup>35</sup>** And he made the veil of blue and purple and scarlet yarns and fine twisted linen; the work of a skillful craftsman he made it, with cherubim. **<sup>36</sup>** And he made for it four pillars of acacia and overlaid them with gold; their hooks were of gold, and he cast for them four sockets of silver. **<sup>37</sup>** And he made a screen for the entrance of the tent: of blue and purple and scarlet yarns and fine twisted linen, the work of an embroiderer, **<sup>38</sup>** and its five pillars with their hooks. And he overlaid their tops and their bands with gold, but their five sockets were of bronze. 

## Chapter 37

**<sup>1</sup>** Bezalel made the ark of acacia wood. Two and a half cubits was its length, one and a half cubits its width, and one and a half cubits its height. **<sup>2</sup>** He overlaid it with pure gold inside and out, and made a gold molding around it. **<sup>3</sup>** He cast four rings of gold for it, for its four feet: two rings on one side of it and two rings on the other side. **<sup>4</sup>** He made poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold. **<sup>5</sup>** He put the poles into the rings on the sides of the ark, to carry the ark.

**<sup>6</sup>** He made a cover of pure gold, two and a half cubits long and one and a half cubits wide. **<sup>7</sup>** He made two cherubim of gold. He made them of hammered work, at the two ends of the cover. **<sup>8</sup>** One cherub at one end and one cherub at the other end; from the cover he made the cherubim at its two ends. **<sup>9</sup>** The cherubim spread out their wings above, covering the cover with their wings. Their faces were toward each other; the faces of the cherubim were turned toward the cover.

**<sup>10</sup>** He made the table of acacia wood. Two cubits was its length, one cubit its width, and one and a half cubits its height. **<sup>11</sup>** He overlaid it with pure gold and made a gold molding around it. **<sup>12</sup>** He made a rim around it, a handbreadth wide, and made a gold molding around the rim. **<sup>13</sup>** He cast for it four rings of gold and fastened the rings to the four corners at its four legs. **<sup>14</sup>** The rings were close to the rim, as holders for the poles to carry the table. **<sup>15</sup>** He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold, to carry the table. **<sup>16</sup>** He made the vessels that were on the table—its dishes, its pans, its bowls, and its jars for pouring—with pure gold.

**<sup>17</sup>** He made the lampstand of pure gold. Of hammered work he made the lampstand—its base and its shaft, its cups, its calyxes, and its blossoms were of one piece with it. **<sup>18</sup>** Six branches came out of its sides, three branches of the lampstand out of one side and three branches of the lampstand out of the other side. **<sup>19</sup>** Three cups shaped like almond blossoms on one branch, with calyx and blossom, and three cups shaped like almond blossoms on the next branch, with calyx and blossom—the same for the six branches coming out of the lampstand. **<sup>20</sup>** On the lampstand itself were four cups shaped like almond blossoms, with calyxes and blossoms. **<sup>21</sup>** And a calyx was under the first pair of branches from it, and a calyx under the second pair of branches from it, and a calyx under the third pair of branches from it, for the six branches coming out of it. **<sup>22</sup>** Their calyxes and their branches were of one piece with it; all of it was a single piece of hammered work of pure gold. **<sup>23</sup>** He made its seven lamps, its tongs, and its trays of pure gold. **<sup>24</sup>** He made it and all its utensils out of a talent of pure gold.

**<sup>25</sup>** He made the altar of incense of acacia wood. A cubit was its length and a cubit its width—it was square—and two cubits its height. Its horns were of one piece with it. **<sup>26</sup>** He overlaid it with pure gold, its top and its sides all around, and its horns. And he made a gold molding for it all around. **<sup>27</sup>** He made two rings of gold for it under its molding, on two sides—on opposite sides—as holders for the poles to carry it. **<sup>28</sup>** He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold. **<sup>29</sup>** He made the holy anointing oil and the pure fragrant incense, blended as by a perfumer. 

## Chapter 38

**<sup>1</sup>** He made the altar of burnt offering of acacia wood. Five cubits was its length and five cubits its width—it was square—and three cubits its height. **<sup>2</sup>** He made its horns on its four corners; its horns were of one piece with it. And he overlaid it with bronze. **<sup>3</sup>** He made all the utensils of the altar: the pots, the shovels, the basins, the forks, and the firepans. All its utensils he made of bronze. **<sup>4</sup>** He made for the altar a grate of bronze mesh, beneath its ledge, reaching halfway up. **<sup>5</sup>** He cast four rings on the four corners of the bronze grate, as holders for the poles. **<sup>6</sup>** He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with bronze. **<sup>7</sup>** He inserted the poles into the rings on the sides of the altar, to carry it. He made it hollow, with boards.

**<sup>8</sup>** He made the basin of bronze, and its base of bronze, from the mirrors of the serving women who served at the entrance of the tent of meeting.

**<sup>9</sup>** He made the courtyard. For the south side, the hangings of the courtyard were of fine twisted linen, a hundred cubits long. **<sup>10</sup>** Its twenty pillars and their twenty bases were of bronze, but the hooks of the pillars and their bands were of silver. **<sup>11</sup>** And for the north side, a hundred cubits, their twenty pillars and their twenty bases were of bronze, but the hooks of the pillars and their bands were of silver. **<sup>12</sup>** And for the west side there were hangings of fifty cubits, with their ten pillars and their ten bases. The hooks of the pillars and their bands were of silver. **<sup>13</sup>** And for the east side, fifty cubits— **<sup>14</sup>** fifteen cubits of hangings on the one side, with their three pillars and their three bases, **<sup>15</sup>** and fifteen cubits of hangings on the other side of the gate of the courtyard, with their three pillars and their three bases. **<sup>16</sup>** All the hangings of the courtyard all around were of fine twisted linen. **<sup>17</sup>** The bases for the pillars were of bronze; the hooks of the pillars and their bands were of silver; the overlaying of their capitals was of silver; and all the pillars of the courtyard were banded with silver.

**<sup>18</sup>** And the screen of the gate of the courtyard was the work of an embroiderer, of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and fine twisted linen. Twenty cubits was the length, and the height in width was five cubits, corresponding to the hangings of the courtyard. **<sup>19</sup>** Their four pillars and their four bases were of bronze. Their hooks were of silver, and the overlaying of their capitals and their bands were of silver. **<sup>20</sup>** All the pegs for the tabernacle and for the courtyard all around were of bronze.

**<sup>21</sup>** These are the records of the tabernacle, the tabernacle of the testimony, as they were recorded by the command of Moses, the service of the Levites under the hand of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest. **<sup>22</sup>** Bezalel son of Uri son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that the LORD had commanded Moses. **<sup>23</sup>** And with him was Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, a craftsman and embroiderer and weaver, in blue and purple and scarlet yarn and fine linen.

**<sup>24</sup>** All the gold that was used for all the work in all the work of the sanctuary—the gold of the wave offering—was twenty-nine talents and 730 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary. **<sup>25</sup>** And the silver from those of the congregation who were recorded was one hundred talents and 1,775 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary— **<sup>26</sup>** a beka per head, that is, half a shekel, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, for each one who passed over to those who were recorded, from twenty years old and upward, for 603,550 men. **<sup>27</sup>** The hundred talents of silver were for casting the bases of the sanctuary and the bases of the veil: one hundred bases from the hundred talents, one talent per base. **<sup>28</sup>** And of the 1,775 shekels, he made hooks for the pillars and overlaid their capitals and made bands for them.

**<sup>29</sup>** And the bronze of the wave offering was seventy talents and 2,400 shekels. **<sup>30</sup>** With it he made the bases for the entrance of the tent of meeting, and the bronze altar and the bronze grate for it and all the utensils of the altar, **<sup>31</sup>** and the bases around the courtyard and the bases of the gate of the courtyard, and all the pegs of the tabernacle and all the pegs around the courtyard. 

## Chapter 39

**<sup>1</sup>** From the blue and purple and scarlet yarn they made finely woven garments for ministering in the sanctuary. They made the holy garments for Aaron, as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>2</sup>** He made the ephod of gold, blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and fine twisted linen. **<sup>3</sup>** They hammered the gold into thin sheets and cut it into threads, to work into the blue and purple and scarlet yarn and the fine linen, skillfully done. **<sup>4</sup>** They made shoulder-pieces for the ephod, joined to it at its two edges. **<sup>5</sup>** And the skillfully woven band of the ephod that was on it was of one piece with it, and of the same workmanship—of gold, blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and fine twisted linen—as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>6</sup>** They made the onyx stones enclosed in gold filigree settings, engraved like the engravings of a signet, with the names of the sons of Israel. **<sup>7</sup>** He set them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, as memorial stones for the sons of Israel, as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>8</sup>** He made the breastpiece, the work of a skillful craftsman, like the work of the ephod—of gold, blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and fine twisted linen. **<sup>9</sup>** It was square; they made the breastpiece doubled, a span in length and a span in width when doubled. **<sup>10</sup>** And they set in it four rows of stones. A row of sardius, topaz, and emerald was the first row; **<sup>11</sup>** and the second row, a turquoise, a sapphire, and a diamond; **<sup>12</sup>** and the third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; **<sup>13</sup>** and the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper. They were enclosed in gold filigree settings. **<sup>14</sup>** The stones were corresponding to the names of the sons of Israel—twelve, according to their names, engraved like signets, each with its name, for the twelve tribes.

**<sup>15</sup>** They made on the breastpiece braided chains like cords, of pure gold. **<sup>16</sup>** And they made two gold filigree settings and two gold rings, and set the two rings on the two edges of the breastpiece. **<sup>17</sup>** And they put the two braided chains of gold into the two rings at the edges of the breastpiece. **<sup>18</sup>** The other two ends of the two braided chains they attached to the two filigree settings. And they fastened them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod at the front. **<sup>19</sup>** They made two rings of gold and set them at the two ends of the breastpiece, on its inside edge next to the ephod. **<sup>20</sup>** They made two other rings of gold and put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, at its front, close to its seam, above the skillfully woven band of the ephod. **<sup>21</sup>** And they bound the breastpiece by its rings to the rings of the ephod with a blue cord, so that it lay above the skillfully woven band of the ephod, so that the breastpiece would not come loose from the ephod, as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>22</sup>** He made the robe of the ephod, woven all of blue. **<sup>23</sup>** And the opening of the robe in the middle of it was like the opening of a garment, with a binding around the opening, so that it would not tear. **<sup>24</sup>** On the hem of the robe they made pomegranates of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine twisted linen. **<sup>25</sup>** And they made bells of pure gold and put the bells between the pomegranates all around the hem of the robe, between the pomegranates— **<sup>26</sup>** a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate around the hem of the robe for ministering, as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>27</sup>** They made the tunics of fine linen, woven work, for Aaron and for his sons, **<sup>28</sup>** and the turban of fine linen, and the headdresses of fine linen, and the undergarments of fine twisted linen, **<sup>29</sup>** and the sash of fine twisted linen and blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, the work of an embroiderer, as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>30</sup>** They made the plate of the holy diadem of pure gold, and wrote on it an inscription like the engraving of a signet: “Holy to the LORD.” **<sup>31</sup>** And they tied to it a blue cord to fasten it on the turban above, as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>32</sup>** Thus all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting was finished. And the sons of Israel did according to all that the LORD had commanded Moses; so they did.

**<sup>33</sup>** Then they brought the tabernacle to Moses—the tent and all its furnishings, its clasps, its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its bases; **<sup>34</sup>** and the covering of ram skins dyed red, and the covering of fine leather, and the veil of the screen; **<sup>35</sup>** the ark of the testimony with its poles, and the cover; **<sup>36</sup>** the table, all its utensils, and the bread of the Presence; **<sup>37</sup>** the pure lampstand, its lamps—the lamps to be set in order—and all its utensils, and the oil for the light; **<sup>38</sup>** and the golden altar, and the anointing oil and the fragrant incense, and the screen for the entrance of the tent; **<sup>39</sup>** the bronze altar, and its grating of bronze, its poles and all its utensils, the basin and its base; **<sup>40</sup>** the hangings of the courtyard, its pillars and its bases, and the screen for the gate of the courtyard, its cords and its pegs, and all the equipment for the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of meeting; **<sup>41</sup>** the finely woven garments for ministering in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest and the garments of his sons for serving as priests.

**<sup>42</sup>** According to all that the LORD had commanded Moses, so the sons of Israel had done all the work. **<sup>43</sup>** Moses saw all the work, and behold, they had done it; just as the LORD had commanded, so they had done. And Moses blessed them. 

## Chapter 40

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “On the first day of the first month you shall set up the tabernacle of the tent of meeting. **<sup>3</sup>** You shall put in it the ark of the testimony, and you shall screen the ark with the veil. **<sup>4</sup>** You shall bring in the table and arrange what belongs on it, and you shall bring in the lampstand and set up its lamps. **<sup>5</sup>** You shall place the golden altar for incense before the ark of the testimony, and set up the screen for the entrance of the tabernacle. **<sup>6</sup>** You shall set the altar of burnt offering before the entrance of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting. **<sup>7</sup>** You shall set the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar, and put water in it. **<sup>8</sup>** You shall set up the courtyard all around and hang up the screen for the gate of the courtyard.

**<sup>9</sup>** Then you shall take the anointing oil and anoint the tabernacle and all that is in it, and you shall consecrate it and all its furnishings; and it shall be holy. **<sup>10</sup>** You shall anoint the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and consecrate the altar; and the altar shall be most holy. **<sup>11</sup>** You shall anoint the basin and its base and consecrate it. **<sup>12</sup>** Then you shall bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance of the tent of meeting and wash them with water. **<sup>13</sup>** You shall put the holy garments on Aaron and anoint him and consecrate him, that he may serve Me as priest. **<sup>14</sup>** You shall bring his sons and clothe them with tunics. **<sup>15</sup>** You shall anoint them just as you anointed their father, that they may serve Me as priests. Their anointing shall be for them an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.”

**<sup>16</sup>** Moses did so; according to all that the LORD had commanded him, so he did.

**<sup>17</sup>** Now in the first month of the second year, on the first day of the month, the tabernacle was set up. **<sup>18</sup>** Moses set up the tabernacle. He laid its bases, set up its boards, inserted its bars, and erected its pillars. **<sup>19</sup>** He spread the tent over the tabernacle and put the covering of the tent over it, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. **<sup>20</sup>** He took the testimony and put it into the ark, and put the poles on the ark, and set the cover on top of the ark. **<sup>21</sup>** He brought the ark into the tabernacle, set up the veil for the screen, and screened off the ark of the testimony, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>22</sup>** He put the table in the tent of meeting on the north side of the tabernacle, outside the veil. **<sup>23</sup>** He arranged the bread on it before the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. **<sup>24</sup>** He placed the lampstand in the tent of meeting opposite the table, on the south side of the tabernacle. **<sup>25</sup>** He set up the lamps before the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. **<sup>26</sup>** He placed the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the veil. **<sup>27</sup>** He burned fragrant incense on it, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. **<sup>28</sup>** He set up the screen at the entrance of the tabernacle. **<sup>29</sup>** He placed the altar of burnt offering at the entrance of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, and offered on it the burnt offering and the grain offering, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. **<sup>30</sup>** He placed the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water in it for washing. **<sup>31</sup>** From it Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet. **<sup>32</sup>** When they went into the tent of meeting and when they came near the altar, they washed, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. **<sup>33</sup>** He set up the courtyard all around the tabernacle and the altar and hung up the screen for the gate of the courtyard. So Moses finished the work.

**<sup>34</sup>** Then the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle. **<sup>35</sup>** Moses was not able to enter the tent of meeting because the cloud settled on it, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle. **<sup>36</sup>** Throughout all their journeys, whenever the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the sons of Israel would set out. **<sup>37</sup>** But if the cloud was not taken up, then they did not set out until the day it was taken up. **<sup>38</sup>** For the cloud of the LORD was on the tabernacle by day, and fire was in it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel throughout all their journeys. 