# The Third Book of Moses, called Leviticus

## Chapter 1

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD called to Moses and spoke to him from the tent of meeting, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, When any man among you brings an offering to the LORD, you shall bring your offering from the livestock, from the herd or from the flock. **<sup>3</sup>** If his offering is a burnt offering from the herd, he shall offer a male without blemish. He shall bring it to the entrance of the tent of meeting, so that he may be accepted before the LORD. **<sup>4</sup>** He shall lay his hand on the head of the burnt offering, and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for himself. **<sup>5</sup>** Then he shall slaughter the bull before the LORD, and Aaron’s sons the priests shall bring the blood and throw the blood against the sides of the altar that is at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>6</sup>** Then he shall skin the burnt offering and cut it into pieces. **<sup>7</sup>** The sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire on the altar and arrange wood on the fire. **<sup>8</sup>** Then Aaron’s sons the priests shall arrange the pieces, the head and the fat, on the wood that is on the fire on the altar. **<sup>9</sup>** But its entrails and its legs he shall wash with water, and the priest shall burn all of it on the altar as a burnt offering, a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD.

**<sup>10</sup>** If his gift for a burnt offering is from the flock, from the sheep or the goats, he shall bring a male without blemish. **<sup>11</sup>** He shall slaughter it on the north side of the altar before the LORD, and Aaron’s sons the priests shall throw its blood against the sides of the altar. **<sup>12</sup>** Then he shall cut it into pieces, with its head and its fat, and the priest shall arrange them on the wood that is on the fire on the altar. **<sup>13</sup>** But the entrails and the legs he shall wash with water, and the priest shall offer all of it and burn it on the altar. It is a burnt offering, a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD.

**<sup>14</sup>** If his offering to the LORD is a burnt offering of birds, then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves or of young pigeons. **<sup>15</sup>** The priest shall bring it to the altar and wring off its head and burn it on the altar. Its blood shall be drained out on the side of the altar. **<sup>16</sup>** He shall remove its crop with its contents and cast it beside the altar on the east side, in the place for ashes. **<sup>17</sup>** He shall tear it open by its wings, but shall not sever it completely. Then the priest shall burn it on the altar, on the wood that is on the fire. It is a burnt offering, a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD. 

## Chapter 2

**<sup>1</sup>** When a man presents a grain offering to the LORD, his offering shall be of fine flour. He shall pour oil on it and put frankincense on it. **<sup>2</sup>** Then he shall bring it to Aaron’s sons, the priests. And he shall take from it a handful of its fine flour and of its oil, with all its frankincense, and the priest shall burn this as its memorial portion on the altar, a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD. **<sup>3</sup>** But the remainder of the grain offering shall be for Aaron and his sons; it is a most holy part of the food offerings to the LORD.

**<sup>4</sup>** When you bring as a grain offering baked goods from the oven, it shall be of unleavened cakes of fine flour mixed with oil, or unleavened wafers spread with oil. **<sup>5</sup>** If your offering is a grain offering baked on a griddle, it shall be of fine flour, unleavened, mixed with oil. **<sup>6</sup>** You shall break it in pieces and pour oil on it; it is a grain offering. **<sup>7</sup>** If your offering is a grain offering cooked in a pan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil. **<sup>8</sup>** And you shall bring the grain offering that is made of these things to the LORD, and when it is presented to the priest, he shall bring it to the altar. **<sup>9</sup>** The priest shall take from the grain offering its memorial portion and burn it on the altar, a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD. **<sup>10</sup>** But the remainder of the grain offering shall be for Aaron and his sons; it is a most holy part of the food offerings to the LORD.

**<sup>11</sup>** No grain offering that you bring to the LORD shall be made with leaven, for you shall burn no leaven nor any honey as a food offering to the LORD. **<sup>12</sup>** As an offering of firstfruits you may bring them to the LORD, but they shall not be offered on the altar for a pleasing aroma. **<sup>13</sup>** You shall season all your grain offerings with salt. You shall not let the salt of the covenant of your God be lacking from your grain offering; with all your offerings you shall offer salt.

**<sup>14</sup>** If you offer a grain offering of firstfruits to the LORD, you shall offer for the grain offering of your firstfruits fresh heads of grain roasted in fire, crushed fresh grain. **<sup>15</sup>** And you shall put oil on it and lay frankincense on it; it is a grain offering. **<sup>16</sup>** And the priest shall burn as its memorial portion some of the crushed grain and some of the oil with all of its frankincense. It is a food offering to the LORD. 

## Chapter 3

**<sup>1</sup>** If a man’s offering is a sacrifice of peace offerings, if he offers an animal from the herd, whether male or female, he shall offer it without blemish before the LORD. **<sup>2</sup>** He shall lay his hand on the head of his offering and slaughter it at the entrance of the tent of meeting. And Aaron’s sons the priests shall throw the blood against the sides of the altar. **<sup>3</sup>** From the sacrifice of peace offerings he shall offer as a food offering to the LORD the fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that is on the entrails, **<sup>4</sup>** and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the long lobe of the liver that he shall remove with the kidneys. **<sup>5</sup>** Then Aaron’s sons shall burn it on the altar on top of the burnt offering, which is on the wood on the fire. It is a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD.

**<sup>6</sup>** If his offering for a sacrifice of peace offerings to the LORD is from the flock, male or female, he shall offer it without blemish. **<sup>7</sup>** If he offers a lamb for his offering, then he shall offer it before the LORD, **<sup>8</sup>** lay his hand on the head of his offering, and slaughter it in front of the tent of meeting. And Aaron’s sons shall throw its blood against the sides of the altar. **<sup>9</sup>** Then from the sacrifice of peace offerings he shall offer as a food offering to the LORD its fat: the fat tail, whole, removed close to the backbone, and the fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that is on the entrails, **<sup>10</sup>** and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the long lobe of the liver that he shall remove with the kidneys. **<sup>11</sup>** And the priest shall burn it on the altar as a food offering to the LORD.

**<sup>12</sup>** If his offering is a goat, then he shall offer it before the LORD **<sup>13</sup>** and lay his hand on its head and slaughter it in front of the tent of meeting. And Aaron’s sons shall throw its blood against the sides of the altar. **<sup>14</sup>** Then he shall offer from it, as his offering, a food offering to the LORD: the fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that is on the entrails, **<sup>15</sup>** and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the long lobe of the liver that he shall remove with the kidneys. **<sup>16</sup>** And the priest shall burn them on the altar as a food offering with a pleasing aroma. All fat is the LORD’s.

**<sup>17</sup>** It shall be a statute forever throughout your generations, in all your dwelling places, that you shall eat neither fat nor blood. 

## Chapter 4

**<sup>1</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, If a person sins unintentionally in any of the LORD’s commandments that should not be done, and does any one of them— **<sup>3</sup>** if it is the anointed priest who sins, thus bringing guilt on the people—then he shall offer for the sin that he has committed a bull from the herd without blemish to the LORD for a sin offering. **<sup>4</sup>** He shall bring the bull to the entrance of the tent of meeting before the LORD, and lay his hand on the head of the bull and slaughter the bull before the LORD. **<sup>5</sup>** And the anointed priest shall take some of the blood of the bull and bring it into the tent of meeting. **<sup>6</sup>** And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle part of the blood seven times before the LORD in front of the veil of the sanctuary. **<sup>7</sup>** And the priest shall put some of the blood on the horns of the altar of fragrant incense before the LORD that is in the tent of meeting, and all the rest of the blood of the bull he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering that is at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>8</sup>** And all the fat of the bull of the sin offering he shall remove from it: the fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that is on the entrails, **<sup>9</sup>** and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the long lobe of the liver that he shall remove with the kidneys **<sup>10</sup>** (just as these are taken from the ox of the sacrifice of peace offerings); and the priest shall burn them on the altar of burnt offering. **<sup>11</sup>** But the skin of the bull and all its flesh, with its head, its legs, its entrails, and its dung— **<sup>12</sup>** all the rest of the bull—he shall carry outside the camp to a clean place, to the ash heap, and burn it on a fire of wood. On the ash heap it shall be burned.

**<sup>13</sup>** If the whole congregation of Israel sins unintentionally, and the matter is hidden from the eyes of the assembly, and they do any of the things that by the LORD’s commandments ought not to be done, and they incur guilt— **<sup>14</sup>** when the sin which they have committed becomes known, the assembly shall offer a bull from the herd for a sin offering and bring it before the tent of meeting. **<sup>15</sup>** And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands on the head of the bull before the LORD, and the bull shall be slaughtered before the LORD. **<sup>16</sup>** Then the anointed priest shall bring some of the blood of the bull into the tent of meeting, **<sup>17</sup>** and the priest shall dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD in front of the veil. **<sup>18</sup>** And he shall put some of the blood on the horns of the altar that is before the LORD in the tent of meeting, and the rest of the blood he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering that is at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>19</sup>** And all its fat he shall take from it and burn on the altar. **<sup>20</sup>** Thus shall he do with the bull. As he did with the bull of the sin offering, so shall he do with this. And the priest shall make atonement for them, and they shall be forgiven. **<sup>21</sup>** And he shall carry the bull outside the camp and burn it, as he burned the first bull. It is a sin offering for the assembly.

**<sup>22</sup>** When a leader sins, doing unintentionally any one of all the things that by the LORD’s commandments ought not to be done, and comes to realize his guilt— **<sup>23</sup>** or the sin that he has committed is made known to him—he shall bring as his offering a goat, a male without blemish, **<sup>24</sup>** and shall lay his hand on the head of the goat and slaughter it in the place where they slaughter the burnt offering before the LORD. It is a sin offering. **<sup>25</sup>** Then the priest shall take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and pour out the rest of its blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering. **<sup>26</sup>** And all its fat he shall burn on the altar, like the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings. So the priest shall make atonement for him for his sin, and he shall be forgiven.

**<sup>27</sup>** If any one of the common men sins unintentionally in doing any one of the things that by the LORD’s commandments ought not to be done, and he comes to realize his guilt— **<sup>28</sup>** or the sin that he has committed is made known to him—he shall bring as his offering a goat, a female without blemish, for the sin which he has committed. **<sup>29</sup>** And he shall lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter the sin offering in the place of the burnt offering. **<sup>30</sup>** And the priest shall take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and pour out all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar. **<sup>31</sup>** And all its fat he shall remove, as the fat is removed from the sacrifice of peace offerings, and the priest shall burn it on the altar for a pleasing aroma to the LORD. And the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be forgiven.

**<sup>32</sup>** If he brings a lamb as his offering for a sin offering, he shall bring a female without blemish **<sup>33</sup>** and lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter it as a sin offering in the place where they slaughter the burnt offering. **<sup>34</sup>** Then the priest shall take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and pour out all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar. **<sup>35</sup>** And all its fat he shall remove, as the fat of the lamb is removed from the sacrifice of peace offerings, and the priest shall burn it on the altar with the offerings by fire to the LORD. Thus the priest shall make atonement for him for the sin which he has committed, and he shall be forgiven. 

## Chapter 5

**<sup>1</sup>** If a man sins by hearing a public charge to testify when he is a witness, whether he has seen or known it, if he does not speak, he shall bear his guilt.

**<sup>2</sup>** Or if a man touches any unclean thing—whether the carcass of an unclean beast or of unclean livestock or of unclean swarming things—and it is hidden from him, and he becomes unclean, and he realizes his guilt; **<sup>3</sup>** or if he touches human uncleanness—whatever uncleanness by which a man becomes unclean—and it is hidden from him, when he comes to know it and realizes his guilt; **<sup>4</sup>** or if a man utters a careless oath, to do evil or to do good, whatever a man may speak rashly with an oath, and it is hidden from him—when he comes to know it and realizes his guilt in one of these things— **<sup>5</sup>** when he realizes his guilt in any of these and confesses the sin he has committed, **<sup>6</sup>** then he shall bring to the LORD as his guilt offering for the sin he has committed, a female from the flock, a lamb or a goat, for a sin offering. And the priest shall make atonement for him for his sin.

**<sup>7</sup>** But if he cannot afford a lamb, then he shall bring to the LORD for his guilt offering for that which he has sinned, two turtledoves or two young pigeons, one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering. **<sup>8</sup>** He shall bring them to the priest, who shall offer first the one for the sin offering. He shall wring its head from its neck but shall not sever it completely, **<sup>9</sup>** and he shall sprinkle some of the blood of the sin offering on the side of the altar, while the rest of the blood shall be drained out at the base of the altar. It is a sin offering. **<sup>10</sup>** Then he shall offer the second for a burnt offering according to the rule. And the priest shall make atonement for him for the sin that he has committed, and he shall be forgiven.

**<sup>11</sup>** But if he cannot afford two turtledoves or two young pigeons, then he shall bring as his offering for the sin he has committed a tenth of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering. He shall put no oil on it and shall put no frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering. **<sup>12</sup>** He shall bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take a handful of it as its memorial portion and burn it on the altar, on the LORD’s food offerings. It is a sin offering. **<sup>13</sup>** Thus the priest shall make atonement for him for the sin he has committed in any one of these things, and he shall be forgiven. And the remainder shall be for the priest, as with the grain offering.

**<sup>14</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>15</sup>** “If a man acts unfaithfully and sins unintentionally in regard to the LORD’s holy things, then he shall bring as his guilt offering to the LORD a ram without blemish from the flock, valued in silver shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, for a guilt offering. **<sup>16</sup>** And he shall make restitution for what he has done wrong in regard to the holy thing, and shall add a fifth to it and give it to the priest. Then the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering, and he shall be forgiven.

**<sup>17</sup>** If a man sins and does any of the things that the LORD has commanded not to be done, even if he did not know it, he is still guilty and shall bear his guilt. **<sup>18</sup>** He shall bring to the priest a ram without blemish from the flock, valued as a guilt offering. And the priest shall make atonement for him for the mistake that he made unintentionally, and he shall be forgiven. **<sup>19</sup>** It is a guilt offering; he has indeed incurred guilt before the LORD. 

## Chapter 6

**<sup>1</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “If a man sins and acts unfaithfully against the LORD by deceiving his fellow in regard to a deposit or security entrusted to him, or through robbery, or if he has oppressed his fellow, **<sup>3</sup>** or has found lost property and lied about it, and swears falsely—in any of all the things that a man does to sin thereby— **<sup>4</sup>** then it shall be, when he has sinned and is guilty, that he shall return what he has stolen, or what he has taken by oppression, or the deposit that was entrusted to him, or the lost property that he found, **<sup>5</sup>** or anything about which he has sworn falsely. He shall restore it in full, and add a fifth to it; he shall give it to the one to whom it belongs on the day he presents his guilt offering. **<sup>6</sup>** Then he shall bring to the priest his guilt offering to the LORD: a ram without blemish from the flock, or its equivalent, for a guilt offering. **<sup>7</sup>** And the priest shall make atonement for him before the LORD, and he shall be forgiven for any of the things he may have done to incur guilt.”

**<sup>8</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>9</sup>** “Command Aaron and his sons, saying, This is the law of the burnt offering: The burnt offering shall remain on the hearth on the altar all night until the morning, and the fire on the altar shall be kept burning on it. **<sup>10</sup>** And the priest shall put on his linen robe, and he shall put on linen undergarments over his flesh. Then he shall take up the ashes to which the fire has reduced the burnt offering on the altar, and place them beside the altar. **<sup>11</sup>** Then he shall take off his garments and put on other garments, and carry the ashes outside the camp to a clean place. **<sup>12</sup>** The fire on the altar shall be kept burning on it; it shall not go out. The priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and he shall arrange the burnt offering on it, and burn the fat of the peace offerings on it. **<sup>13</sup>** Fire shall be kept burning on the altar continually; it shall not go out.

**<sup>14</sup>** This is the law of the grain offering: The sons of Aaron shall offer it before the LORD, in front of the altar. **<sup>15</sup>** And one shall take from it a handful of the fine flour of the grain offering and of its oil, and all the frankincense that is on the grain offering, and shall burn this as its memorial portion on the altar, a pleasing aroma to the LORD. **<sup>16</sup>** And the remainder of it Aaron and his sons shall eat; it shall be eaten unleavened in a holy place. In the court of the tent of meeting they shall eat it. **<sup>17</sup>** It shall not be baked with leaven. I have given it as their portion from my food offerings. It is most holy, like the sin offering and the guilt offering. **<sup>18</sup>** Every male among the sons of Aaron may eat it, as a perpetual statute throughout your generations, from the LORD’s food offerings. Whatever touches them shall become holy.”

**<sup>19</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>20</sup>** “This is the offering that Aaron and his sons shall offer to the LORD on the day when he is anointed: a tenth of an ephah of fine flour as a regular grain offering, half of it in the morning and half in the evening. **<sup>21</sup>** It shall be made with oil on a griddle. You shall bring it well mixed, baked pieces of the grain offering you shall offer, a pleasing aroma to the LORD. **<sup>22</sup>** The priest from among Aaron’s sons, who is anointed to succeed him, shall offer it. It is a perpetual statute before the LORD. It shall be wholly burned. **<sup>23</sup>** Every grain offering of a priest shall be wholly burned; it shall not be eaten.”

**<sup>24</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>25</sup>** “Speak to Aaron and his sons, saying, This is the law of the sin offering: In the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered shall the sin offering be slaughtered before the LORD. It is most holy. **<sup>26</sup>** The priest who offers it for sin shall eat it. It shall be eaten in a holy place, in the court of the tent of meeting. **<sup>27</sup>** Whatever touches its flesh shall be holy, and if any of its blood is spattered on a garment, you shall wash that on which it was spattered in a holy place. **<sup>28</sup>** And the earthenware vessel in which it is boiled shall be broken. But if it is boiled in a bronze vessel, it shall be scoured and rinsed in water. **<sup>29</sup>** Every male among the priests may eat of it; it is most holy. **<sup>30</sup>** But no sin offering shall be eaten from which any of the blood is brought into the tent of meeting to make atonement in the Holy Place; it shall be burned with fire. 

## Chapter 7

**<sup>1</sup>** This is the law of the guilt offering. It is most holy. **<sup>2</sup>** In the place where they slaughter the burnt offering they shall slaughter the guilt offering, and its blood shall be dashed against the sides of the altar. **<sup>3</sup>** And all its fat shall be offered: the fat tail, the fat that covers the entrails, **<sup>4</sup>** the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the long lobe of the liver that he shall remove with the kidneys. **<sup>5</sup>** The priest shall burn them on the altar as a food offering to the LORD; it is a guilt offering. **<sup>6</sup>** Every male among the priests may eat of it. It shall be eaten in a holy place. It is most holy. **<sup>7</sup>** The guilt offering is like the sin offering; there is one law for them: the priest who makes atonement with it shall have it.

**<sup>8</sup>** And the priest who offers any man’s burnt offering shall have for himself the skin of the burnt offering that he has offered. **<sup>9</sup>** And every grain offering that is baked in the oven and all that is prepared in a pan or on a griddle shall belong to the priest who offers it. **<sup>10</sup>** And every grain offering, mixed with oil or dry, shall be shared equally among all the sons of Aaron.

**<sup>11</sup>** This is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings that one may offer to the LORD. **<sup>12</sup>** If he offers it for thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the thanksgiving sacrifice unleavened cakes mixed with oil, unleavened wafers smeared with oil, and cakes of fine flour well mixed with oil. **<sup>13</sup>** With the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving he shall bring his offering with cakes of leavened bread. **<sup>14</sup>** And from it he shall offer one cake from each offering, as a gift to the LORD. It shall belong to the priest who dashes the blood of the peace offerings. **<sup>15</sup>** And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten on the day of his offering; he shall not leave any of it until the morning.

**<sup>16</sup>** But if the sacrifice of his offering is a vow offering or a freewill offering, it shall be eaten on the day that he offers his sacrifice, and on the next day what remains of it shall be eaten. **<sup>17</sup>** But what remains of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burned with fire. **<sup>18</sup>** If any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings is eaten on the third day, it shall not be accepted, neither shall it be credited to him who offers it. It is tainted, and the person who eats of it shall bear his iniquity.

**<sup>19</sup>** Flesh that touches any unclean thing shall not be eaten. It shall be burned with fire. All who are clean may eat flesh, **<sup>20</sup>** but the person who eats of the flesh of the sacrifice of the LORD’s peace offerings while an uncleanness is on him, that person shall be cut off from his people. **<sup>21</sup>** And if anyone touches an unclean thing, whether human uncleanness or an unclean beast or any unclean swarming creature, and then eats of the flesh of the sacrifice of the LORD’s peace offerings, that person shall be cut off from his people.

**<sup>22</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>23</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, You shall eat no fat of ox or sheep or goat. **<sup>24</sup>** The fat of an animal that dies of itself and the fat of one that is torn by beasts may be put to any use, but on no account shall you eat it. **<sup>25</sup>** For every person who eats of the fat of an animal from which a food offering may be made to the LORD shall be cut off from his people. **<sup>26</sup>** Moreover, you shall eat no blood whatever, whether of bird or of beast, in any of your dwelling places. **<sup>27</sup>** Whoever eats any blood, that person shall be cut off from his people.”

**<sup>28</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>29</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, Whoever offers the sacrifice of his peace offerings to the LORD shall bring his offering to the LORD from the sacrifice of his peace offerings. **<sup>30</sup>** His own hands shall bring the LORD’s food offerings. He shall bring the fat with the breast, that the breast may be waved as a wave offering before the LORD. **<sup>31</sup>** The priest shall burn the fat on the altar, but the breast shall be for Aaron and his sons. **<sup>32</sup>** And the right thigh you shall give to the priest as a contribution from the sacrifice of your peace offerings. **<sup>33</sup>** The son of Aaron who offers the blood of the peace offerings and the fat shall have the right thigh for his portion. **<sup>34</sup>** For the breast that is waved and the thigh that is contributed I have taken from the sons of Israel, from their sacrifices of peace offerings, and have given them to Aaron the priest and to his sons, as a perpetual obligation that is due from the sons of Israel.

**<sup>35</sup>** This is the portion for Aaron and his sons from the LORD’s food offerings, from the day they were presented to serve as priests of the LORD. **<sup>36</sup>** The LORD commanded this to be given them by the sons of Israel, from the day that he anointed them. It is a perpetual statute throughout their generations.

**<sup>37</sup>** This is the law of the burnt offering, of the grain offering, of the sin offering, of the guilt offering, of the ordination offering, and of the peace offering, **<sup>38</sup>** which the LORD commanded Moses on Mount Sinai, on the day that he commanded the sons of Israel to bring their offerings to the LORD, in the wilderness of Sinai. 

## Chapter 8

**<sup>1</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments and the anointing oil and the bull of the sin offering and the two rams and the basket of unleavened bread, **<sup>3</sup>** and assemble all the congregation at the entrance of the tent of meeting.” **<sup>4</sup>** And Moses did as the LORD commanded him, and the congregation was assembled at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>5</sup>** And Moses said to the congregation, “This is the thing that the LORD has commanded to be done.” **<sup>6</sup>** And Moses brought Aaron and his sons and washed them with water. **<sup>7</sup>** And he put on him the tunic and tied the sash around his waist and clothed him with the robe and put the ephod on him and tied the skillfully woven band of the ephod around him, binding it to him with the band. **<sup>8</sup>** And he placed the breastpiece on him, and in the breastpiece he put the Urim and the Thummim. **<sup>9</sup>** And he set the turban on his head, and on the turban, in front, he set the golden plate, the holy crown, as the LORD commanded Moses.

**<sup>10</sup>** Then Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it, and consecrated them. **<sup>11</sup>** And he sprinkled some of it on the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all its utensils and the basin and its stand, to consecrate them. **<sup>12</sup>** And he poured some of the anointing oil on Aaron’s head and anointed him, to consecrate him. **<sup>13</sup>** And Moses brought Aaron’s sons and clothed them with tunics and tied sashes around their waists and bound caps on them, as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>14</sup>** Then he brought the bull of the sin offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the bull of the sin offering. **<sup>15</sup>** And he slaughtered it, and Moses took the blood, and with his finger he put it on the horns of the altar around it and purified the altar and poured out the blood at the base of the altar and consecrated it, to make atonement for it. **<sup>16</sup>** And he took all the fat that was on the entrails and the lobe of the liver and the two kidneys with their fat, and Moses burned them on the altar. **<sup>17</sup>** But the bull and its skin and its flesh and its dung he burned with fire outside the camp, as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>18</sup>** Then he presented the ram of the burnt offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram. **<sup>19</sup>** And he slaughtered it, and Moses threw the blood against the sides of the altar. **<sup>20</sup>** He cut the ram into pieces, and Moses burned the head and the pieces and the fat. **<sup>21</sup>** And he washed the entrails and the legs with water, and Moses burned the whole ram on the altar. It was a burnt offering with a pleasing aroma, a food offering to the LORD, as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>22</sup>** Then he presented the other ram, the ram of ordination, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram. **<sup>23</sup>** And he slaughtered it, and Moses took some of its blood and put it on the lobe of Aaron’s right ear and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot. **<sup>24</sup>** Then he presented Aaron’s sons, and Moses put some of the blood on the lobes of their right ears and on the thumbs of their right hands and on the big toes of their right feet. And Moses cast the blood against the sides of the altar. **<sup>25</sup>** Then he took the fat and the fat tail and all the fat that was on the entrails and the lobe of the liver and the two kidneys with their fat and the right thigh, **<sup>26</sup>** and out of the basket of unleavened bread that was before the LORD he took one unleavened loaf and one loaf of bread with oil and one wafer and placed them on the pieces of fat and on the right thigh. **<sup>27</sup>** And he put all these in the hands of Aaron and in the hands of his sons and waved them as a wave offering before the LORD. **<sup>28</sup>** Then Moses took them from their hands and burned them on the altar with the burnt offering. This was an ordination offering with a pleasing aroma, a food offering to the LORD. **<sup>29</sup>** And Moses took the breast and waved it as a wave offering before the LORD. It was Moses’ portion of the ram of ordination, as the LORD commanded Moses.

**<sup>30</sup>** Then Moses took some of the anointing oil and of the blood that was on the altar and sprinkled it on Aaron and his garments, and also on his sons and his sons’ garments. So he consecrated Aaron and his garments, and his sons and his sons’ garments with him.

**<sup>31</sup>** And Moses said to Aaron and his sons, “Boil the flesh at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and eat it there and eat also the bread that is in the basket of ordination offerings, as I commanded, saying, ‘Aaron and his sons shall eat it.’ **<sup>32</sup>** And what remains of the flesh and the bread you shall burn with fire. **<sup>33</sup>** And you shall not go outside the entrance of the tent of meeting for seven days, until the days of your ordination are completed, for it will take seven days to ordain you. **<sup>34</sup>** As has been done today, the LORD has commanded to be done to make atonement for you. **<sup>35</sup>** At the entrance of the tent of meeting you shall remain day and night for seven days, performing what the LORD has charged, so that you do not die, for so I have been commanded.” **<sup>36</sup>** And Aaron and his sons did all the things that the LORD commanded by Moses. 

## Chapter 9

**<sup>1</sup>** On the eighth day Moses called Aaron and his sons and the elders of Israel. **<sup>2</sup>** And he said to Aaron, “Take for yourself a calf from the herd for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering, both without blemish, and offer them before the LORD. **<sup>3</sup>** And say to the sons of Israel, ‘Take a male goat for a sin offering, and a calf and a lamb, both a year old and without blemish, for a burnt offering, **<sup>4</sup>** and an ox and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before the LORD, and a grain offering mixed with oil. For today the LORD will appear to you.’” **<sup>5</sup>** And they brought what Moses commanded in front of the tent of meeting, and all the congregation drew near and stood before the LORD. **<sup>6</sup>** And Moses said, “This is the thing that the LORD commanded you to do, that the glory of the LORD may appear to you.” **<sup>7</sup>** Then Moses said to Aaron, “Draw near to the altar and offer your sin offering and your burnt offering and make atonement for yourself and for the people. Then present the offering of the people and make atonement for them, as the LORD has commanded.” **<sup>8</sup>** So Aaron drew near to the altar and slaughtered the calf of the sin offering, which was for himself. **<sup>9</sup>** And the sons of Aaron presented the blood to him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on the horns of the altar and poured out the blood at the base of the altar. **<sup>10</sup>** But the fat and the kidneys and the lobe of the liver from the sin offering he burned on the altar, as the LORD commanded Moses. **<sup>11</sup>** The flesh and the skin he burned with fire outside the camp. **<sup>12</sup>** Then he slaughtered the burnt offering, and Aaron’s sons handed him the blood, and he splashed it against the sides of the altar. **<sup>13</sup>** And they handed the burnt offering to him, piece by piece, and the head, and he burned them on the altar. **<sup>14</sup>** And he washed the entrails and the legs and burned them with the burnt offering on the altar. **<sup>15</sup>** Then he presented the people’s offering and took the goat of the sin offering that was for the people and slaughtered it and offered it for sin, like the first one. **<sup>16</sup>** And he presented the burnt offering and offered it according to the rule. **<sup>17</sup>** And he presented the grain offering and took a handful of it and burned it on the altar, besides the burnt offering of the morning. **<sup>18</sup>** Then he slaughtered the ox and the ram, the sacrifice of peace offerings for the people. And Aaron’s sons handed him the blood, and he splashed it against the sides of the altar. **<sup>19</sup>** But the fat pieces of the ox and of the ram, the fat tail and that which covers the entrails and the kidneys and the lobe of the liver— **<sup>20</sup>** they put the fat pieces on the breasts, and he burned the fat pieces on the altar. **<sup>21</sup>** But the breasts and the right thigh Aaron waved as a wave offering before the LORD, as Moses commanded. **<sup>22</sup>** Then Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people and blessed them, and he came down from offering the sin offering and the burnt offering and the peace offerings. **<sup>23</sup>** And Moses and Aaron went into the tent of meeting, and when they came out they blessed the people, and the glory of the LORD appeared to all the people. **<sup>24</sup>** And fire came out from before the LORD and consumed the burnt offering and the fat on the altar, and when all the people saw it, they shouted and fell on their faces. 

## Chapter 10

**<sup>1</sup>** Now Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, each took his censer and put fire in it and laid incense on it, and they offered unauthorized fire before the LORD, which He had not commanded them. **<sup>2</sup>** And fire came out from before the LORD and consumed them, and they died before the LORD. **<sup>3</sup>** Then Moses said to Aaron, “This is what the LORD spoke, saying, ‘Among those who are near me I will be treated with reverence, and before all the people I will be glorified.’” And Aaron was silent.

**<sup>4</sup>** Then Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel, Aaron's uncle, and said to them, “Come, carry your brothers from the sanctuary outside the camp.” **<sup>5</sup>** So they came and carried them in their tunics outside the camp, as Moses had said. **<sup>6</sup>** And Moses said to Aaron, and to Eleazar and Ithamar, his sons, “Do not let the hair of your heads hang loose, and do not tear your garments, lest you die and wrath come upon all the congregation. But your brothers, the whole house of Israel, shall mourn for you over the burning that the LORD has kindled. **<sup>7</sup>** And you shall not go out from the entrance of the tent of meeting, lest you die, for the anointing oil of the LORD is upon you.” And they did according to the word of Moses.

**<sup>8</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Aaron, saying, **<sup>9</sup>** “Do not drink wine or strong drink, you or your sons with you, when you go into the tent of meeting, lest you die. It shall be a statute forever throughout your generations, **<sup>10</sup>** so as to distinguish between the holy and the common, and between the unclean and the clean, **<sup>11</sup>** and so that you are able to teach the sons of Israel all the statutes which the LORD has spoken to them by the hand of Moses.”

**<sup>12</sup>** Then Moses spoke to Aaron and to Eleazar and Ithamar, his surviving sons, “Take the grain offering that remains of the LORD’s offerings by fire and eat it unleavened beside the altar, for it is most holy. **<sup>13</sup>** You shall eat it in a holy place, because it is your due and your sons’ due from the LORD’s offerings by fire, for so I have been commanded. **<sup>14</sup>** And the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the contribution offering you shall eat in a clean place, you and your sons and your daughters with you, for they are given as your due and your sons’ due from the sacrifices of the peace offerings of the sons of Israel. **<sup>15</sup>** The thigh of the contribution and the breast of the wave offering they shall bring with the offerings by fire of the fat, to wave as a wave offering before the LORD, and it shall be yours and your sons’ with you as a perpetual due, as the LORD has commanded.”

**<sup>16</sup>** Now Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and found that it had been burned. And he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, the surviving sons of Aaron, saying, **<sup>17</sup>** “Why did you not eat the sin offering in the holy place? For it is most holy, and He gave it to you to bear the guilt of the congregation, to make atonement for them before the LORD. **<sup>18</sup>** Look here, its blood was not brought into the inner part of the sanctuary. You should certainly have eaten it in the sanctuary, as I commanded.” **<sup>19</sup>** But Aaron said to Moses, “Today they have offered their sin offering and their burnt offering before the LORD, such things like this have happened to me also. If I had eaten the sin offering today, would it have been pleasing in the sight of the LORD?” **<sup>20</sup>** And when Moses heard that, it was good in his sight. 

## Chapter 11

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying to them, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, These are the living things which you may eat among all the animals that are on the earth: **<sup>3</sup>** Whatever animal has a split hoof, completely divided, and chews the cud, you may eat. **<sup>4</sup>** Nevertheless, of those that chew the cud or divide the hoof, you shall not eat the camel, because it chews the cud but does not divide the hoof, it is unclean to you; **<sup>5</sup>** nor the hyrax, because it chews the cud but does not divide the hoof, it is unclean to you; **<sup>6</sup>** nor the hare, because it chews the cud but does not divide the hoof, it is unclean to you; **<sup>7</sup>** nor the pig, because it divides the hoof and is cloven-footed but does not chew the cud, it is unclean to you. **<sup>8</sup>** You shall not eat their flesh, and you shall not touch their carcasses; they are unclean to you.

**<sup>9</sup>** These you may eat of all that are in the waters: whatever has fins and scales in the waters, in the seas and in the rivers, you may eat. **<sup>10</sup>** But whatever does not have fins and scales in the seas and in the rivers, of all that swarm in the waters and of all the living things that are in the waters, they are an abomination to you. **<sup>11</sup>** They shall be an abomination to you; you shall not eat their flesh, and you shall detest their carcasses. **<sup>12</sup>** Whatever water animal that does not have fins and scales is an abomination to you.

**<sup>13</sup>** And these you shall detest among the birds; they shall not be eaten, they are an abomination: the eagle, the vulture, the black vulture, **<sup>14</sup>** the kite and the falcon according to its kind, **<sup>15</sup>** every raven according to its kind, **<sup>16</sup>** the ostrich, the owl, the gull and the hawk according to its kind, **<sup>17</sup>** the little owl, the cormorant, the great owl, **<sup>18</sup>** the white owl, the pelican, the carrion vulture, **<sup>19</sup>** the stork, the heron according to its kind, and the hoopoe and the bat.

**<sup>20</sup>** All winged swarming things that go on all fours are an abomination to you. **<sup>21</sup>** Yet these you may eat of every winged swarming thing that goes on all fours, which have jointed legs above their feet, with which to leap on the earth. **<sup>22</sup>** These you may eat: the locust according to its kind, the bald locust according to its kind, the cricket according to its kind, and the grasshopper according to its kind. **<sup>23</sup>** But all other winged swarming things that have four feet are an abomination to you.

**<sup>24</sup>** And by these you shall become unclean: whoever touches their carcass shall be unclean until the evening. **<sup>25</sup>** And whoever carries any part of their carcass shall wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening. **<sup>26</sup>** Every animal that has a split hoof but is not completely divided or does not chew the cud is unclean to you; everyone who touches them shall be unclean. **<sup>27</sup>** And whatever goes on its paws among all the animals that go on all fours, they are unclean to you; whoever touches their carcass shall be unclean until the evening. **<sup>28</sup>** And the one who carries their carcass shall wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening; they are unclean to you.

**<sup>29</sup>** And among the things that swarm on the earth, these are unclean to you: the mole rat, the mouse, the great lizard according to its kind, **<sup>30</sup>** the gecko, the monitor lizard, the wall lizard, the skink, and the chameleon. **<sup>31</sup>** Among all that swarm, they are unclean to you; whoever touches them when they are dead shall be unclean until the evening. **<sup>32</sup>** And anything on which one of them falls when they are dead shall be unclean, whether it is any article of wood or clothing or skin or sack—any article that is used for any purpose—it shall be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the evening; then it shall be clean. **<sup>33</sup>** And if any of them falls into an earthen vessel, whatever is in it shall be unclean, and you shall break it. **<sup>34</sup>** Any food that may be eaten which comes into contact with such water shall be unclean, and any drink that may be drunk from such a vessel shall be unclean. **<sup>35</sup>** And everything on which any part of their carcass falls shall be unclean: an oven or stove shall be broken down; they are unclean and shall be unclean to you. **<sup>36</sup>** Nevertheless, a spring or a cistern holding water shall be clean, but whoever touches their carcass in it shall be unclean. **<sup>37</sup>** And if any part of their carcass falls on any seed which is to be sown, it is clean. **<sup>38</sup>** But if water is put on the seed and any part of their carcass falls on it, it is unclean to you.

**<sup>39</sup>** And if any animal which you may eat dies, whoever touches its carcass shall be unclean until the evening. **<sup>40</sup>** And whoever eats of its carcass shall wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening. And whoever carries its carcass shall wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening.

**<sup>41</sup>** And every thing that swarms on the earth is an abomination; it shall not be eaten. **<sup>42</sup>** Whatever goes on its belly and whatever goes on all fours or whatever has many feet among all the things that swarm on the earth, you shall not eat them, for they are an abomination. **<sup>43</sup>** Do not make yourselves detestable with any thing that swarms, and you shall not make yourselves unclean with them and become unclean by them. **<sup>44</sup>** For I am the LORD your God. Consecrate yourselves therefore and be holy, for I am holy. And you shall not defile yourselves with any swarming thing that moves on the earth. **<sup>45</sup>** For I am the LORD who brought you up out of the land of Egypt to be your God. You shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.

**<sup>46</sup>** This is the law about the animals and the birds and every living creature that moves in the waters and every creature that swarms on the earth, **<sup>47</sup>** to make a distinction between the unclean and the clean, and between the living creature that may be eaten and the living creature that may not be eaten. 

## Chapter 12

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, If a woman conceives and bears a male child, then she shall be unclean for seven days; as in the days of her menstrual impurity, she shall be unclean. **<sup>3</sup>** And on the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised. **<sup>4</sup>** Then she shall continue in the blood of her purification for thirty-three days. She shall not touch anything holy, and she shall not come into the sanctuary until the days of her purification are completed.

**<sup>5</sup>** But if she bears a female child, then she shall be unclean for two weeks, as in her menstruation, and she shall continue in the blood of her purification for sixty-six days.

**<sup>6</sup>** And when the days of her purification are completed, for a son or for a daughter, she shall bring to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting a lamb a year old for a burnt offering and a pigeon or a turtledove for a sin offering. **<sup>7</sup>** And he shall offer it before the LORD and make atonement for her, and she shall be clean from the flow of her blood. This is the law for a woman who bears a child, either male or female.

**<sup>8</sup>** And if she cannot afford a lamb, then she shall take two turtledoves or two pigeons, one for a burnt offering and the other for a sin offering, and the priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be clean. 

## Chapter 13

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “When a man has on the skin of his body a swelling or a scab or a bright spot, and it becomes an infection of leprosy on the skin of his body, then he shall be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons the priests. **<sup>3</sup>** And the priest shall examine the infection on the skin of the body, and if the hair in the infection has turned white and the infection appears to be deeper than the skin of his body, it is a leprous infection; when the priest has seen it, he shall pronounce him unclean. **<sup>4</sup>** But if the bright spot is white on the skin of his body, and it does not appear to be deeper than the skin, and the hair has not turned white, then the priest shall quarantine the infected person for seven days. **<sup>5</sup>** And the priest shall examine him on the seventh day, and behold, if in his eyes the infection remains unchanged and the infection has not spread on the skin, then the priest shall quarantine him for seven more days. **<sup>6</sup>** And the priest shall examine him again on the seventh day, and if the infection has faded and has not spread on the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean; it is a scab. He shall wash his clothes and be clean.

**<sup>7</sup>** But if the scab spreads further on the skin after he has shown himself to the priest for his cleansing, he shall appear again before the priest. **<sup>8</sup>** And the priest shall examine him, and if the scab has spread on the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is leprosy.

**<sup>9</sup>** When the infection of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought to the priest, **<sup>10</sup>** and the priest shall examine him, and if there is a white swelling on the skin, and it has turned the hair white, and there is raw flesh in the swelling, **<sup>11</sup>** it is a chronic leprosy on the skin of his body, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean. He shall not quarantine him, for he is unclean.

**<sup>12</sup>** And if the leprosy breaks out over the skin, and the leprosy covers all the skin of the infected person from his head even to his feet, as far as the priest can see, **<sup>13</sup>** then the priest shall examine him, and if the leprosy has covered all his body, he shall pronounce clean him who has the infection; it has all turned white, and he is clean. **<sup>14</sup>** But whenever raw flesh appears on him, he shall be unclean. **<sup>15</sup>** And the priest shall examine the raw flesh and pronounce him unclean; the raw flesh is unclean, it is leprosy. **<sup>16</sup>** Or if the raw flesh turns again and is changed to white, then he shall come to the priest, **<sup>17</sup>** and the priest shall examine him, and if the infection has turned white, then the priest shall pronounce the infected person clean; he is clean.

**<sup>18</sup>** And when the body has a boil on the skin and it is healed, **<sup>19</sup>** and in the place of the boil there comes a white swelling or a reddish-white bright spot, then it shall be shown to the priest. **<sup>20</sup>** And the priest shall examine it, and if it appears to be deeper than the skin and the hair has turned white, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is an infection of leprosy that has broken out in the boil. **<sup>21</sup>** But if the priest examines it and there is no white hair in it, and it is not deeper than the skin and has faded, then the priest shall quarantine him seven days. **<sup>22</sup>** And if it spreads over the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is an infection. **<sup>23</sup>** But if the bright spot remains in its place and has not spread, it is a scar from the boil, and the priest shall pronounce him clean.

**<sup>24</sup>** Or if the body sustains a burn on the skin by fire, and the raw flesh of the burn becomes a reddish-white or bright white spot, **<sup>25</sup>** then the priest shall examine it, and if the hair in the bright spot has turned white and it appears to be deeper than the skin, it is leprosy that has broken out in the burn, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a leprous infection. **<sup>26</sup>** But if the priest examines it and there is no white hair in the bright spot, and it is not deeper than the skin and has faded, then the priest shall quarantine him seven days. **<sup>27</sup>** And the priest shall examine him on the seventh day. If it spreads on the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is an infection of leprosy. **<sup>28</sup>** But if the bright spot remains in its place and has not spread on the skin and has faded, it is the swelling from the burn, and the priest shall pronounce him clean; for it is the scar from the burn.

**<sup>29</sup>** And when a man or woman has an infection on the head or on the beard, **<sup>30</sup>** then the priest shall examine the infection, and behold, if it appears to be deeper than the skin and there is in it thin yellow hair, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is an itch, a leprous disease of the head or the beard. **<sup>31</sup>** But if the priest examines the infection and there appears to be no depth in it and no black hair in it, then the priest shall quarantine the infected person for seven days. **<sup>32</sup>** And on the seventh day the priest shall examine the infection, and if the itch has not spread and there is no yellow hair in it and the itch does not appear to be deeper than the skin, **<sup>33</sup>** then he shall shave himself, but he shall not shave the itch. And the priest shall quarantine the person with the itch for another seven days. **<sup>34</sup>** Then on the seventh day the priest shall examine the itch, and if the itch has not spread on the skin and does not appear to be deeper than the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean; and he shall wash his clothes and be clean. **<sup>35</sup>** But if the itch spreads on the skin after his cleansing, **<sup>36</sup>** then the priest shall examine him, and if the itch has spread on the skin, the priest need not look for the yellow hair; he is unclean. **<sup>37</sup>** But if in his eyes the itch has remained and black hair has grown in it, the itch is healed, and he is clean; and the priest shall pronounce him clean.

**<sup>38</sup>** And when a man or a woman has bright spots on the skin of the body, bright white spots, **<sup>39</sup>** then the priest shall examine them, and behold, if the bright spots on the skin of the body are a dull white, it is a harmless rash that has broken out on the skin; he is clean.

**<sup>40</sup>** If a man loses the hair of his head, he is bald; he is clean. **<sup>41</sup>** And if the hair falls out from the front of his head, he is bald on the forehead; he is clean. **<sup>42</sup>** But if on the bald head or the bald forehead there is a reddish-white infection, it is leprosy breaking out on his bald head or on his bald forehead. **<sup>43</sup>** Then the priest shall examine him, and if the swelling of the infection is reddish-white on his bald head or on his bald forehead, like the appearance of leprosy in the skin of the body, **<sup>44</sup>** he is a leprous man; he is unclean. The priest shall surely pronounce him unclean; his infection is on his head.

**<sup>45</sup>** And the leper who has the infection, his clothes shall be torn and the hair of his head shall hang loose, and he shall cover his upper lip and cry out, ‘Unclean, unclean.’ **<sup>46</sup>** All the days during which the infection is in him he shall remain unclean. He is unclean; he shall dwell alone; his dwelling shall be outside the camp.

**<sup>47</sup>** When there is a garment with a leprous disease in it, whether it is a wool or linen garment, **<sup>48</sup>** whether in the warp or woof of linen or wool, or in a leather article or anything made of leather, **<sup>49</sup>** and the infection is greenish or reddish in the garment or in the leather or in the warp or in the woof or in any article of leather, it is a leprous disease and shall be shown to the priest. **<sup>50</sup>** Then the priest shall examine the infection and quarantine the infected article for seven days. **<sup>51</sup>** And he shall examine the infection on the seventh day. If the infection has spread in the garment, in the warp or in the woof, or in the leather, whatever its use, the infection is a persistent leprous disease; it is unclean. **<sup>52</sup>** So he shall burn the garment, the warp or the woof, the wool or the linen, or any article of leather in which the infection is, for it is a persistent leprous disease; it shall be burned in the fire.

**<sup>53</sup>** But if the priest examines it and the infection has not spread in the garment or in the warp or in the woof or in any article of leather, **<sup>54</sup>** then the priest shall command them to wash the thing in which the infection is, and he shall quarantine it for seven more days. **<sup>55</sup>** Then the priest shall examine the infection after it has been washed, and if the infection has not changed in appearance though the infection has not spread, it is unclean; you shall burn it in the fire. It is a fungus, whether on the inside or the outside. **<sup>56</sup>** But if the priest looks, and sees that the infection has faded after it has been washed, then he shall tear it out of the garment or the leather or the warp or the woof. **<sup>57</sup>** And if it appears again in the garment, in the warp or the woof, or in any article of leather, it is breaking out; you shall burn the infected item in the fire. **<sup>58</sup>** And the garment or the warp or the woof or any article of leather which has been washed and the infection has departed from them shall be washed a second time and shall be clean.

**<sup>59</sup>** This is the law for a leprous disease in a garment of wool or linen, in warp or woof or any article of leather, for pronouncing it clean or unclean. 

## Chapter 14

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “This shall be the law of the leper on the day of his cleansing: He shall be brought to the priest, **<sup>3</sup>** and the priest shall go outside the camp. Then the priest shall examine him, and if the leprous disease is healed in the leper, **<sup>4</sup>** the priest shall command that two live clean birds be taken for him who is to be cleansed, and cedarwood and scarlet yarn and hyssop. **<sup>5</sup>** And the priest shall command them to kill one of the birds in an earthen vessel over fresh water. **<sup>6</sup>** As for the live bird, he shall take it, and the cedarwood and the scarlet yarn and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the live bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the fresh water. **<sup>7</sup>** Then he shall sprinkle it seven times on him who is to be cleansed of the leprous disease. Then he shall pronounce him clean and shall let the live bird go free in the open field.

**<sup>8</sup>** He who is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes and shave off all his hair and bathe himself in water, and he shall be clean. After that he shall come into the camp, but shall live outside his tent seven days. **<sup>9</sup>** And on the seventh day he shall shave off all his hair from his head, his beard, and his eyebrows. He shall shave off all his hair, and he shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water, and he shall be clean.

**<sup>10</sup>** On the eighth day he shall take two male lambs without blemish, and one ewe lamb a year old without blemish, and a grain offering of three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil, and one log of oil. **<sup>11</sup>** And the priest who cleanses him shall set the man who is to be cleansed and these things before the LORD at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>12</sup>** Then the priest shall take one of the male lambs and offer it as a guilt offering, along with the log of oil, and wave them as a wave offering before the LORD. **<sup>13</sup>** And he shall kill the lamb in the place where they kill the sin offering and the burnt offering, in the place of the sanctuary—for the guilt offering, like the sin offering, belongs to the priest; it is most holy. **<sup>14</sup>** Then the priest shall take some of the blood of the guilt offering, and the priest shall put it on the lobe of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot. **<sup>15</sup>** Then the priest shall take some of the log of oil and pour it into the palm of his own left hand, **<sup>16</sup>** and dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left hand and sprinkle some of the oil with his finger seven times before the LORD. **<sup>17</sup>** And some of the oil that remains in his hand the priest shall put on the lobe of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot, on top of the blood of the guilt offering. **<sup>18</sup>** And the rest of the oil that is in the priest’s hand he shall put on the head of him who is to be cleansed. Then the priest shall make atonement for him before the LORD.

**<sup>19</sup>** The priest shall offer the sin offering, to make atonement for him who is to be cleansed from his uncleanness. Then afterward he shall kill the burnt offering. **<sup>20</sup>** And the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the grain offering on the altar. Thus the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be clean.

**<sup>21</sup>** But if he is poor and cannot afford so much, then he shall take one male lamb for a guilt offering to be waved, to make atonement for him, and one-tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, and a log of oil; **<sup>22</sup>** also two turtledoves or two pigeons, whichever he can afford. One shall be a sin offering and the other a burnt offering. **<sup>23</sup>** And on the eighth day he shall bring them for his cleansing to the priest, at the entrance of the tent of meeting, before the LORD. **<sup>24</sup>** And the priest shall take the lamb of the guilt offering and the log of oil, and the priest shall wave them as a wave offering before the LORD. **<sup>25</sup>** And he shall kill the lamb of the guilt offering. And the priest shall take some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the lobe of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot. **<sup>26</sup>** And the priest shall pour some of the oil into the palm of his own left hand, **<sup>27</sup>** and shall sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before the LORD. **<sup>28</sup>** And the priest shall put some of the oil that is in his hand on the lobe of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot, in the place where the blood of the guilt offering was put. **<sup>29</sup>** And the rest of the oil that is in the priest’s hand he shall put on the head of him who is to be cleansed, to make atonement for him before the LORD. **<sup>30</sup>** And he shall offer one of the turtledoves or pigeons, whichever he can afford, **<sup>31</sup>** one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering along with the grain offering. And the priest shall make atonement before the LORD for him who is to be cleansed. **<sup>32</sup>** This is the law for him in whom is a leprous disease, who cannot afford the offerings for his cleansing.

**<sup>33</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, **<sup>34</sup>** “When you come into the land of Canaan, which I give you for a possession, and I put a leprous disease in a house in the land of your possession, **<sup>35</sup>** then he who owns the house shall come and tell the priest, saying, ‘There seems to me to be something like a disease in the house.’ **<sup>36</sup>** Then the priest shall command that they empty the house before the priest goes to examine the disease, lest all that is in the house be declared unclean. And afterward the priest shall go in to examine the house. **<sup>37</sup>** And he shall examine the disease, and if the disease is in the walls of the house with greenish or reddish spots, and it appears deeper than the wall, **<sup>38</sup>** then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house and quarantine the house for seven days. **<sup>39</sup>** And the priest shall come again on the seventh day and examine it, and if the disease has spread in the walls of the house, **<sup>40</sup>** then the priest shall command that they take out the stones in which is the disease and throw them into an unclean place outside the city. **<sup>41</sup>** And he shall have the inside of the house scraped all around, and they shall pour out the plaster that they scrape off into an unclean place outside the city. **<sup>42</sup>** Then they shall take other stones and put them in the place of those stones, and he shall take other plaster and replaster the house.

**<sup>43</sup>** But if the disease breaks out again in the house after he has taken out the stones and scraped the house and it is plastered, **<sup>44</sup>** then the priest shall go and examine it. And if the disease has spread in the house, it is a persistent leprous disease in the house; it is unclean. **<sup>45</sup>** And he shall break down the house, its stones and timber and all the plaster of the house, and he shall carry them out of the city to an unclean place.

**<sup>46</sup>** Moreover, he who goes into the house while it is quarantined shall be unclean until evening, **<sup>47</sup>** and he who sleeps in the house shall wash his clothes, and he who eats in the house shall wash his clothes.

**<sup>48</sup>** But if the priest comes and examines it and behold, the disease has not spread in the house after the house was plastered, then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, for the disease is healed. **<sup>49</sup>** And he shall take two birds, cedarwood, scarlet yarn, and hyssop to cleanse the house. **<sup>50</sup>** And he shall kill one of the birds in an earthen vessel over fresh water, **<sup>51</sup>** and shall take the cedarwood and the hyssop and the scarlet yarn, along with the live bird, and dip them in the blood of the bird that was killed and in the fresh water, and sprinkle the house seven times. **<sup>52</sup>** Thus he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird and with the fresh water and with the live bird and with the cedarwood and the hyssop and the scarlet yarn. **<sup>53</sup>** Then he shall let the live bird go out of the city into the open field. So he shall make atonement for the house, and it shall be clean.

**<sup>54</sup>** This is the law for any case of leprous disease: for an itch, **<sup>55</sup>** for leprosy in a garment or in a house, **<sup>56</sup>** and for a swelling or a scab or a bright spot, **<sup>57</sup>** to teach when it is unclean and when it is clean. This is the law of leprous disease. 

## Chapter 15

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘When any man has a discharge from his body, his discharge is unclean. **<sup>3</sup>** This shall be his uncleanness in regard to his discharge: whether his body allows the discharge to flow or obstructs its flow, it is his uncleanness.

**<sup>4</sup>** Every bed on which the one with the discharge lies shall be unclean, and everything on which he sits shall be unclean. **<sup>5</sup>** And anyone who touches his bed shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>6</sup>** And he who sits on anything on which the one with the discharge has sat shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>7</sup>** And he who touches the body of the one with the discharge shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>8</sup>** And if the one with the discharge spits on him who is clean, then he also shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>9</sup>** Every saddle on which the one with the discharge rides shall be unclean. **<sup>10</sup>** And whoever touches anything that was under him shall be unclean until evening. And he who carries such things shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>11</sup>** And anyone whom the one with the discharge touches without having rinsed his hands in water shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>12</sup>** An earthen vessel which the one with the discharge touches shall be broken, and every wooden vessel shall be rinsed in water.

**<sup>13</sup>** When the one with the discharge is cleansed of his discharge, he shall count seven days for himself for his cleansing; then he shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in fresh water, and he shall be clean. **<sup>14</sup>** On the eighth day he shall take for himself two turtledoves or two pigeons and come before the LORD at the entrance of the tent of meeting and give them to the priest. **<sup>15</sup>** And the priest shall offer them, one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering. So the priest shall make atonement for him before the LORD for his discharge.

**<sup>16</sup>** If a man has an emission of semen, he shall bathe all his body in water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>17</sup>** And every garment and every skin on which the semen is shall be washed with water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>18</sup>** When a man lies with a woman and has an emission of semen, they shall bathe in water and be unclean until evening.

**<sup>19</sup>** When a woman has a discharge, and her discharge from her body is blood, she shall be in her menstrual impurity for seven days, and whoever touches her shall be unclean until evening. **<sup>20</sup>** And everything on which she lies during her menstrual impurity shall be unclean. Everything also on which she sits shall be unclean. **<sup>21</sup>** And whoever touches her bed shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>22</sup>** And whoever touches anything on which she sits shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>23</sup>** Whether it is the bed or anything on which she sits, when he touches it, he shall be unclean until evening. **<sup>24</sup>** And if any man lies with her and her menstrual impurity is on him, he shall be unclean seven days, and every bed on which he lies shall be unclean.

**<sup>25</sup>** If a woman has a discharge of blood for many days, not at the time of her menstrual impurity, or if she has a discharge beyond the time of her impurity, all the days of her impure discharge she shall be as in the days of her menstrual impurity; she shall be unclean. **<sup>26</sup>** Every bed on which she lies all the days of her discharge shall be to her as the bed of her impurity; and everything on which she sits shall be unclean, as in the uncleanness of her impurity. **<sup>27</sup>** And whoever touches these things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and be unclean until evening. **<sup>28</sup>** But if she is cleansed of her discharge, then she shall count seven days, and afterward she shall be clean. **<sup>29</sup>** On the eighth day she shall take for herself two turtledoves or two pigeons and bring them to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>30</sup>** And the priest shall offer one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering. So the priest shall make atonement for her before the LORD for the uncleanness of her discharge.

**<sup>31</sup>** Thus you shall separate the sons of Israel from their uncleanness, lest they die in their uncleanness by defiling my tabernacle that is in their midst.

**<sup>32</sup>** This is the law for the one who has a discharge and for him who has an emission of semen, becoming unclean thereby, **<sup>33</sup>** and for her who is sick with her impurity and for the one who has a discharge, whether male or female, and for a man who lies with a woman who is unclean. 

## Chapter 16

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they drew near before the LORD and died. **<sup>2</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, “Tell Aaron your brother not to come at any time into the Holy Place inside the veil, before the mercy seat that is on the ark, so that he may not die, for I appear in the cloud over the mercy seat.

**<sup>3</sup>** But in this way Aaron shall come into the Holy Place: with a bull from the herd for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering. **<sup>4</sup>** He shall put on the holy linen tunic and shall have the linen undergarment on his body. He shall tie the linen sash around his waist and wear the linen turban; these are the holy garments. He shall bathe his body in water and then put them on. **<sup>5</sup>** And he shall take from the congregation of the sons of Israel two male goats for a sin offering and one ram for a burnt offering.

**<sup>6</sup>** Aaron shall offer the bull as a sin offering for himself and shall make atonement for himself and for his house. **<sup>7</sup>** Then he shall take the two goats and set them before the LORD at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>8</sup>** And Aaron shall cast lots over the two goats, one lot for the LORD and the other lot for Azazel. **<sup>9</sup>** And Aaron shall present the goat on which the lot for the LORD fell and offer it as a sin offering. **<sup>10</sup>** But the goat on which the lot for Azazel fell shall be presented alive before the LORD to make atonement over it, that it may be sent away into the wilderness to Azazel.

**<sup>11</sup>** Aaron shall present the bull of the sin offering for himself and shall make atonement for himself and for his house. He shall kill the bull of the sin offering for himself. **<sup>12</sup>** And he shall take a censer full of coals of fire from the altar before the LORD, and two handfuls of sweet incense beaten small, and he shall bring it inside the veil **<sup>13</sup>** and put the incense on the fire before the LORD, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat that is on the testimony, so that he does not die. **<sup>14</sup>** And he shall take some of the blood of the bull and sprinkle it with his finger on the front of the mercy seat on the east side, and in front of the mercy seat he shall sprinkle some of the blood with his finger seven times.

**<sup>15</sup>** Then he shall kill the goat of the sin offering that is for the people and bring its blood inside the veil and do with its blood as he did with the blood of the bull, sprinkling it upon the mercy seat and in front of the mercy seat. **<sup>16</sup>** Thus he shall make atonement for the Holy Place, because of the uncleanness of the sons of Israel and because of their transgressions, all their sins. And so he shall do for the tent of meeting, which dwells with them in the midst of their uncleanness. **<sup>17</sup>** No man shall be in the tent of meeting when he enters to make atonement in the Holy Place until he comes out and has made atonement for himself and for his household and for all the assembly of Israel. **<sup>18</sup>** Then he shall go out to the altar that is before the LORD and make atonement for it, and shall take some of the blood of the bull and of the blood of the goat and put it on the horns of the altar all around. **<sup>19</sup>** And he shall sprinkle some of the blood on it with his finger seven times and cleanse it and consecrate it from the uncleanness of the sons of Israel.

**<sup>20</sup>** And when he has finished atoning for the Holy Place and the tent of meeting and the altar, he shall present the live goat. **<sup>21</sup>** And Aaron shall lay both his hands on the head of the live goat and confess over it all the iniquities of the sons of Israel and all their transgressions, all their sins. And he shall put them on the head of the goat and send it away into the wilderness by the hand of a man who is in readiness. **<sup>22</sup>** The goat shall bear all their iniquities on itself to a remote area, and he shall let the goat go free in the wilderness.

**<sup>23</sup>** Then Aaron shall come into the tent of meeting and shall take off the linen garments that he put on when he went into the Holy Place and shall leave them there. **<sup>24</sup>** And he shall bathe his body in water in a holy place and put on his garments and come out and offer his burnt offering and the burnt offering of the people and make atonement for himself and for the people. **<sup>25</sup>** And the fat of the sin offering he shall burn on the altar. **<sup>26</sup>** And he who lets the goat go to Azazel shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water, and afterward he may come into the camp. **<sup>27</sup>** And the bull of the sin offering and the goat of the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the Holy Place, shall be carried outside the camp. Their skin and their flesh and their dung shall be burned with fire. **<sup>28</sup>** And he who burns them shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water, and afterward he may come into the camp.

**<sup>29</sup>** And this shall be a statute to you forever: in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, you shall afflict yourselves and shall do no work, neither the native nor the stranger who sojourns among you. **<sup>30</sup>** For on this day shall atonement be made for you to cleanse you. You shall be clean before the LORD from all your sins. **<sup>31</sup>** It is a sabbath of solemn rest to you, and you shall afflict yourselves; it is a statute forever. **<sup>32</sup>** And the priest who is anointed and consecrated to serve as priest in his father's place shall make atonement, wearing the holy linen garments. **<sup>33</sup>** He shall make atonement for the holy sanctuary, and he shall make atonement for the tent of meeting and for the altar, and he shall make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the assembly. **<sup>34</sup>** And this shall be a statute forever for you, that atonement may be made for the sons of Israel once in the year because of all their sins.” And he did as the LORD commanded Moses. 

## Chapter 17

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to Aaron and to his sons and to all the sons of Israel, and say to them, This is the thing that the LORD has commanded:

**<sup>3</sup>** If any man of the house of Israel kills an ox or a lamb or a goat in the camp, or kills it outside the camp, **<sup>4</sup>** and does not bring it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to offer it as a gift to the LORD before the tabernacle of the LORD, bloodguilt shall be imputed to that man. He has shed blood, and that man shall be cut off from among his people. **<sup>5</sup>** This is so that the sons of Israel may bring their sacrifices that they offer in the open field, that they may bring them to the LORD, to the entrance of the tent of meeting, to the priest, and offer them as peace offerings to the LORD. **<sup>6</sup>** And the priest shall throw the blood on the altar of the LORD at the entrance of the tent of meeting and burn the fat for a pleasing aroma to the LORD. **<sup>7</sup>** So they shall no more sacrifice their sacrifices to goat demons, after whom they whore. This shall be a statute forever for them throughout their generations.

**<sup>8</sup>** And you shall say to them: Any man of the house of Israel, or of the foreigners who sojourn among them, who offers a burnt offering or sacrifice **<sup>9</sup>** and does not bring it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to offer it to the LORD, that man shall be cut off from his people.

**<sup>10</sup>** If any man of the house of Israel or of the foreigners who sojourn among them eats any blood, I will set my face against that person who eats blood and will cut him off from among his people. **<sup>11</sup>** For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you on the altar to make atonement for your lives, for it is the blood that makes atonement by the life. **<sup>12</sup>** This is why I have said to the sons of Israel, No person among you shall eat blood, nor shall any foreigner who lives among you eat blood.

**<sup>13</sup>** Any man of the sons of Israel, or of the foreigners who live among them, who hunts any beast or bird that may be eaten shall pour out its blood and cover it with dust. **<sup>14</sup>** For the life of every creature is its blood: its life is in its blood. Therefore I have said to the sons of Israel, You shall not eat the blood of any creature, for the life of every creature is its blood; whoever eats it shall be cut off.

**<sup>15</sup>** And every person who eats what dies on its own or what is killed by beasts, whether he is a native or a foreigner, shall wash his clothes and bathe himself in water and be unclean until evening; then he shall be clean. **<sup>16</sup>** But if he does not wash them or bathe his flesh, he shall bear his iniquity. 

## Chapter 18

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, I am the LORD your God. **<sup>3</sup>** You shall not do as they do in the land of Egypt, where you lived, and you shall not do as they do in the land of Canaan, where I am bringing you. You shall not live by their customs. **<sup>4</sup>** You shall follow my rules and keep my statutes and walk in them. I am the LORD your God. **<sup>5</sup>** You shall therefore keep my statutes and my rules; if a man does them, he shall live by them. I am the LORD.

**<sup>6</sup>** None of you shall approach any one of his close relatives to uncover nakedness. I am the LORD. **<sup>7</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father, which is the nakedness of your mother; she is your mother, you shall not uncover her nakedness. **<sup>8</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s wife; it is your father’s nakedness. **<sup>9</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of your sister, the daughter of your father or the daughter of your mother, whether born at home or born abroad. **<sup>10</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of your son’s daughter or your daughter’s daughter, for their nakedness is your own. **<sup>11</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of the daughter of your father’s wife, begotten by your father; she is your sister. **<sup>12</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s sister; she is your father’s flesh. **<sup>13</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of your mother’s sister, for she is your mother’s flesh. **<sup>14</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s brother. You shall not approach his wife; she is your aunt. **<sup>15</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of your daughter-in-law; she is your son’s wife. You shall not uncover her nakedness. **<sup>16</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of your brother’s wife; it is your brother’s nakedness. **<sup>17</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter. You shall not take her son’s daughter or her daughter’s daughter to uncover her nakedness; they are near relatives. It is depravity. **<sup>18</sup>** And you shall not take a woman as a rival wife to her sister, to uncover her nakedness while her sister is still alive.

**<sup>19</sup>** You shall not approach a woman to uncover her nakedness while she is in her menstrual uncleanness. **<sup>20</sup>** And you shall not lie sexually with your neighbor’s wife and so make yourself unclean with her. **<sup>21</sup>** You shall not give any of your children as an offering to Molech, and so profane the name of your God. I am the LORD. **<sup>22</sup>** You shall not lie with a man as with a woman; it is an abomination. **<sup>23</sup>** And you shall not lie with any beast and so make yourself unclean with it, and a woman shall not stand before a beast to mate with it; it is a perversion.

**<sup>24</sup>** Do not make yourselves unclean by any of these things, for by all these the nations I am driving out before you have become unclean. **<sup>25</sup>** And the land became unclean, so I punished its iniquity, and the land vomited out its inhabitants. **<sup>26</sup>** But you shall keep my statutes and my rules and do none of these abominations, either the native or the foreigner who lives among you **<sup>27</sup>** (for the men of the land, who were before you, did all these abominations so that the land became unclean), **<sup>28</sup>** lest the land vomit you out when you make it unclean, as it vomited out the nation that was before you.

**<sup>29</sup>** For everyone who does any of these abominations, those persons who do them shall be cut off from among their people. **<sup>30</sup>** So keep my charge never to practice any of these abominable customs that were practiced before you, and never to make yourselves unclean by them. I am the LORD your God. 

## Chapter 19

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to all the congregation of the sons of Israel and say to them, You shall be holy, for I the LORD your God am holy.

**<sup>3</sup>** Every man shall revere his mother and his father, and you shall keep my Sabbaths. I am the LORD your God. **<sup>4</sup>** Do not turn to idols or make for yourselves molten gods. I am the LORD your God.

**<sup>5</sup>** When you offer a sacrifice of peace offerings to the LORD, you shall offer it so that it may be accepted. **<sup>6</sup>** It shall be eaten on the day you offer it or on the next day, and what remains until the third day shall be burned with fire. **<sup>7</sup>** If it is eaten at all on the third day, it is tainted; it shall not be accepted. **<sup>8</sup>** And everyone who eats it shall bear his iniquity, because he has profaned what is holy to the LORD, and that person shall be cut off from his people.

**<sup>9</sup>** When you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not reap your field to the edges, nor shall you gather the gleanings of your harvest. **<sup>10</sup>** And you shall not strip your vineyard bare, nor shall you gather the fallen grapes of your vineyard. You shall leave them for the poor and for the foreigner. I am the LORD your God.

**<sup>11</sup>** You shall not steal; you shall not deal falsely; you shall not lie to one another. **<sup>12</sup>** You shall not swear falsely by my name, and so profane the name of your God. I am the LORD. **<sup>13</sup>** You shall not oppress your neighbor or rob him. The wages of a hired man shall not remain with you all night until the morning. **<sup>14</sup>** You shall not curse the deaf or put a stumbling block before the blind, but you shall fear your God. I am the LORD.

**<sup>15</sup>** You shall do no injustice in judgment. You shall not be partial to the poor or defer to the great, but you shall judge your neighbor in righteousness. **<sup>16</sup>** You shall not go about as a slanderer among your people, and you shall not stand against the life of your neighbor. I am the LORD.

**<sup>17</sup>** You shall not hate your brother in your heart, but you must rebuke your neighbor when he sins, lest you bear sin because of him. **<sup>18</sup>** You shall not take vengeance or bear a grudge against the sons of your own people, but you shall love your neighbor as yourself. I am the LORD.

**<sup>19</sup>** You shall keep my statutes. You shall not let your livestock breed with a different kind. You shall not sow your field with two kinds of seed, and you shall not wear a garment of cloth made of two kinds of material.

**<sup>20</sup>** If a man lies sexually with a woman who is a slave, designated for another man but not yet redeemed or given her freedom, there shall be an investigation. They shall not be put to death, because she was not free. **<sup>21</sup>** And he shall bring his guilt offering to the LORD, to the entrance of the tent of meeting, a ram for a guilt offering. **<sup>22</sup>** And the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering before the LORD for his sin that he committed, and he shall be forgiven for the sin that he committed.

**<sup>23</sup>** When you come into the land and plant any kind of tree for food, then you shall regard its fruit as forbidden. Three years it shall be forbidden to you; it shall not be eaten. **<sup>24</sup>** And in the fourth year all its fruit shall be holy, an offering of praise to the LORD. **<sup>25</sup>** But in the fifth year you may eat of its fruit, to increase its yield for you. I am the LORD your God.

**<sup>26</sup>** You shall not eat any flesh with the blood in it. You shall not practice divination or sorcery. **<sup>27</sup>** You shall not round off the hair on your temples or mar the edges of your beard. **<sup>28</sup>** You shall not make cuts on your flesh for the dead or tattoo any marks upon you. I am the LORD.

**<sup>29</sup>** Do not profane your daughter by making her a prostitute, lest the land fall into prostitution and the land become full of depravity. **<sup>30</sup>** You shall keep my Sabbaths and revere my sanctuary. I am the LORD.

**<sup>31</sup>** Do not turn to mediums or to those who consult spirits; do not seek them out, and so make yourselves unclean by them. I am the LORD your God.

**<sup>32</sup>** You shall rise before the gray head and honor the face of the old man, and you shall fear your God. I am the LORD.

**<sup>33</sup>** When a foreigner sojourns with you in your land, you shall not do him wrong. **<sup>34</sup>** The foreigner who sojourns with you shall be to you as the native among you, and you shall love him as yourself, for you were foreigners in the land of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.

**<sup>35</sup>** You shall do no wrong in judgment, in measures of length or weight or quantity. **<sup>36</sup>** You shall have just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin. I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt. **<sup>37</sup>** And you shall observe all my statutes and all my rules and do them. I am the LORD. 

## Chapter 20

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Say to the sons of Israel, Any man from the sons of Israel or from the foreigners who sojourn in Israel who sacrifices any of his children to Molech shall surely be put to death. The people of the land shall stone him with stones. **<sup>3</sup>** I myself will set my face against that man and will cut him off from among his people, because he has sacrificed one of his children to Molech, made my sanctuary unclean and profaned my holy name. **<sup>4</sup>** And if the people of the land close their eyes to that man when he sacrifices one of his children to Molech and do not put him to death, **<sup>5</sup>** then I will set my face against that man and against his clan and will cut them off from among their people, both him and all who follow him in whoring after Molech.

**<sup>6</sup>** If a man turns to mediums and to familiar spirits, whoring after them, I will set my face against that man and will cut him off from among his people. **<sup>7</sup>** Consecrate yourselves, therefore, and be holy, for I am the LORD your God. **<sup>8</sup>** And you shall keep my statutes and do them. I am the LORD who sanctifies you.

**<sup>9</sup>** For anyone who curses his father or his mother shall surely be put to death; he has cursed his father or his mother—his blood is upon him.

**<sup>10</sup>** If a man commits adultery with the wife of another man, with the wife of his neighbor, both the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death. **<sup>11</sup>** If a man lies with his father’s wife, he has uncovered his father’s nakedness; both of them shall surely be put to death—their blood is upon them. **<sup>12</sup>** If a man lies with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be put to death—they have committed perversion; their blood is upon them. **<sup>13</sup>** If a man lies with a male as one lies with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination—they shall surely be put to death; their blood is upon them. **<sup>14</sup>** If a man takes a woman and her mother also, it is depravity. He and they shall be burned with fire, that there may be no depravity among you.

**<sup>15</sup>** If a man lies with an animal, he shall surely be put to death, and you shall kill the animal. **<sup>16</sup>** If a woman approaches any animal to mate with it, you shall kill the woman and the animal—they shall surely be put to death; their blood is upon them.

**<sup>17</sup>** If a man takes his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother, and sees her nakedness, and she sees his nakedness, it is a disgrace, and they shall be cut off in the sight of their people. He has uncovered his sister’s nakedness—he shall bear his iniquity. **<sup>18</sup>** If a man lies with a woman during her menstrual impurity and uncovers her nakedness, he has made naked her fountain, and she has uncovered the fountain of her blood—both of them shall be cut off from among their people. **<sup>19</sup>** You shall not uncover the nakedness of your mother’s sister or of your father’s sister, for that is to make naked one’s close relative—they shall bear their iniquity. **<sup>20</sup>** If a man lies with his uncle’s wife, he has uncovered his uncle’s nakedness—they shall bear their sin; they shall die childless. **<sup>21</sup>** If a man takes his brother’s wife, it is impurity—he has uncovered his brother’s nakedness; they shall be childless.

**<sup>22</sup>** You shall therefore keep all my statutes and all my rules and do them, that the land where I am bringing you to dwell may not vomit you out. **<sup>23</sup>** And you shall not walk in the customs of the nation that I am driving out before you, for they did all these things, and therefore I detested them. **<sup>24</sup>** But I have said to you, You shall inherit their land, and I will give it to you to possess, a land flowing with milk and honey. I am the LORD your God, who has set you apart from the nations.

**<sup>25</sup>** You shall therefore make a distinction between the clean beast and the unclean, and between the unclean bird and the clean. You shall not make yourselves detestable by beast or by bird or by anything with which the ground teems, which I have set apart for you to hold unclean. **<sup>26</sup>** You shall be holy to me, for I the LORD am holy and have set you apart from the nations to be mine.

**<sup>27</sup>** A man or a woman who is a medium or has a familiar spirit shall surely be put to death. They shall be stoned with stones—their blood is upon them. 

## Chapter 21

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD said to Moses, “Speak to the priests, the sons of Aaron, and say to them: No man shall make himself unclean for the dead among his people, **<sup>2</sup>** except for his closest relatives: for his mother, his father, his son, his daughter, and his brother, **<sup>3</sup>** and for his virgin sister who is near to him, who has had no husband—for her he may make himself unclean. **<sup>4</sup>** But he shall not make himself unclean as a chief man among his people, to profane himself.

**<sup>5</sup>** They shall not make bald patches on their heads, nor shave off the edges of their beards, nor make any cuts in their flesh. **<sup>6</sup>** They shall be holy to their God and not profane the name of their God. For they offer the offerings of the LORD made by fire, the food of their God; therefore they shall be holy.

**<sup>7</sup>** They shall not take a woman who is a prostitute or profaned, neither shall they take a woman divorced from her husband, for the priest is holy to his God. **<sup>8</sup>** You shall sanctify him, for he offers the food of your God. He shall be holy to you, for I the LORD, who sanctify you, am holy.

**<sup>9</sup>** If the daughter of any priest profanes herself by prostitution, she profanes her father—she shall be burned with fire.

**<sup>10</sup>** The priest who is highest among his brothers, on whose head the anointing oil has been poured and who has been consecrated to wear the garments, shall not let his hair hang loose nor tear his garments. **<sup>11</sup>** He shall not go in to any dead body nor make himself unclean, even for his father or his mother. **<sup>12</sup>** He shall not go out of the sanctuary, lest he profane the sanctuary of his God, for the consecration of the anointing oil of his God is on him. I am the LORD.

**<sup>13</sup>** He shall take a wife in her virginity. **<sup>14</sup>** A widow or a divorced woman or a woman who has been defiled or a prostitute—these he shall not take. But he shall take as his wife a virgin of his own people, **<sup>15</sup>** that he may not profane his offspring among his people, for I am the LORD who sanctifies him.

**<sup>16</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>17</sup>** “Speak to Aaron, saying, No man of your offspring throughout their generations who has a blemish shall approach to offer the food of his God. **<sup>18</sup>** For no man who has a blemish shall draw near, a man blind or lame, or who has a mutilated face or a limb too long, **<sup>19</sup>** or a man who has a broken foot or a broken hand, **<sup>20</sup>** or a hunchback or a dwarf, or a man with a defect in his eyes, or an itching disease or scabs or crushed testicles. **<sup>21</sup>** No man of the offspring of Aaron the priest who has a blemish shall come near to offer the LORD’s offerings made by fire. He has a blemish; he shall not come near to offer the food of his God. **<sup>22</sup>** He may eat the food of his God, both of the most holy and of the holy things, **<sup>23</sup>** but he shall not go through the veil or approach the altar, because he has a blemish, that he may not profane my sanctuaries. For I am the LORD who sanctifies them.”

**<sup>24</sup>** So Moses spoke to Aaron and to his sons and to all the sons of Israel. 

## Chapter 22

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Tell Aaron and his sons to be careful with the holy things of the sons of Israel, which they dedicate to me, so that they do not profane my holy name. I am the LORD. **<sup>3</sup>** Say to them, If any man among all your descendants throughout your generations approaches the holy things that the sons of Israel dedicate to the LORD while he is unclean, that person shall be cut off from before me. I am the LORD. **<sup>4</sup>** No man of the offspring of Aaron who is a leper or has a discharge may eat of the holy things until he is clean. And if anyone touches anything made unclean by a corpse, or if a man has an emission of semen, **<sup>5</sup>** or if a man touches any swarming thing by which he may be made unclean, or any man through whom he becomes unclean, whatever his uncleanness may be— **<sup>6</sup>** the person who touches such shall be unclean until evening and shall not eat of the holy things unless he has bathed his body in water. **<sup>7</sup>** When the sun sets, he shall be clean; and afterward he may eat of the holy things, for it is his food. **<sup>8</sup>** He shall not eat what dies of itself or is torn by beasts, becoming unclean by it. I am the LORD.

**<sup>9</sup>** They shall therefore keep my charge, so that they do not bear sin for it and die thereby if they profane it. I am the LORD who sanctifies them.

**<sup>10</sup>** No layman may eat of a holy thing; a foreigner with a priest or a hired servant shall not eat of a holy thing. **<sup>11</sup>** But if a priest buys a slave as his property with his money, that one may eat of it, and those born in his house may eat of his food. **<sup>12</sup>** If a priest’s daughter marries a layman, she shall not eat of the contribution of the holy things. **<sup>13</sup>** But if the priest’s daughter becomes a widow or is divorced and has no child and returns to her father’s house, as in her youth, she may eat of her father’s food. But no layman shall eat of it.

**<sup>14</sup>** If a man eats of a holy thing unintentionally, he shall add a fifth to it and give the holy thing to the priest. **<sup>15</sup>** They shall not profane the holy things of the sons of Israel, which they contribute to the LORD, **<sup>16</sup>** and so cause them to bear iniquity and guilt by eating their holy things, for I am the LORD who sanctifies them.

**<sup>17</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>18</sup>** “Speak to Aaron and to his sons and to all the sons of Israel and say to them: When any man of the house of Israel or of the foreigners in Israel presents his offering, whether for any of their votive offerings or for any of their freewill offerings that they present to the LORD as a burnt offering, **<sup>19</sup>** it must be a male without blemish from the cattle, the sheep, or the goats, to be accepted. **<sup>20</sup>** You shall not offer anything that has a blemish, for it will not be accepted for you. **<sup>21</sup>** And when a man offers a sacrifice of peace offerings to the LORD to fulfill a vow or as a freewill offering from the herd or from the flock, it must be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish in it. **<sup>22</sup>** Animals that are blind or broken or maimed or have a discharge or an itching disease or scabs you shall not offer to the LORD or make them an offering by fire on the altar to the LORD. **<sup>23</sup>** You may present a bull or a lamb that has a part too long or too short for a freewill offering, but for a vow it will not be accepted. **<sup>24</sup>** Any animal that has its testicles bruised or crushed or torn or cut you shall not offer to the LORD. You shall not do it in your land, **<sup>25</sup>** and you shall not offer as the bread of your God any such animals acquired from a foreigner. Since they have a blemish or they are mutilated, they will not be accepted from you.”

**<sup>26</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>27</sup>** “When an ox or a sheep or a goat is born, it shall remain seven days with its mother, and from the eighth day on it shall be accepted as an offering made by fire to the LORD. **<sup>28</sup>** But you shall not slaughter an ox or a sheep and her young on the same day.

**<sup>29</sup>** When you offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving to the LORD, you shall present it in an acceptable manner. **<sup>30</sup>** It shall be eaten on the same day; you shall leave none of it until morning. I am the LORD.

**<sup>31</sup>** So you shall keep my commandments and do them. I am the LORD. **<sup>32</sup>** And you shall not profane my holy name, so that I may be sanctified among the sons of Israel. I am the LORD who sanctifies you, **<sup>33</sup>** and brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God. I am the LORD. 

## Chapter 23

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, These are the appointed times of the LORD, which you shall proclaim as holy convocations. They are my appointed times.

**<sup>3</sup>** Six days you will do your work, but on the seventh day is a Sabbath of solemn rest, a holy convocation. You shall not do any work. It is a Sabbath to the LORD wherever you live.

**<sup>4</sup>** These are the appointed times of the LORD, the holy convocations, which you shall proclaim at their appointed times: **<sup>5</sup>** In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at twilight, is the LORD’s Passover. **<sup>6</sup>** And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the Feast of Unleavened Bread to the LORD; for seven days you shall eat unleavened bread. **<sup>7</sup>** On the first day you shall have a holy convocation; you shall not do any ordinary work. **<sup>8</sup>** But for seven days you shall present an offering by fire to the LORD. On the seventh day is a holy convocation; you shall not do any ordinary work.

**<sup>9</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>10</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, When you come into the land that I give you and reap its harvest, then you shall bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest to the priest. **<sup>11</sup>** He shall wave the sheaf before the LORD so that you may be accepted. On the day after the Sabbath the priest shall wave it. **<sup>12</sup>** On the day when you wave the sheaf, you shall offer a male lamb a year old without blemish as a burnt offering to the LORD. **<sup>13</sup>** And its grain offering shall be two tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil, a food offering to the LORD with a pleasing aroma; and its drink offering shall be of wine, a fourth of a hin. **<sup>14</sup>** And you shall eat neither bread nor roasted grain nor fresh grain until this same day, until you have brought the offering of your God. It is a statute forever throughout your generations wherever you live.

**<sup>15</sup>** You shall count seven full weeks from the day after the Sabbath, from the day that you brought the sheaf of the wave offering. **<sup>16</sup>** You shall count fifty days to the day after the seventh Sabbath. Then you shall present a new grain offering to the LORD. **<sup>17</sup>** You shall bring from your dwellings two loaves of bread for a wave offering, made of two tenths of an ephah; they shall be of fine flour, and they shall be baked with leaven, as firstfruits to the LORD. **<sup>18</sup>** And you shall present with the bread seven lambs a year old without blemish, and one bull from the herd and two rams. They shall be a burnt offering to the LORD, with their grain offering and their drink offerings, a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD. **<sup>19</sup>** And you shall offer one male goat for a sin offering, and two male lambs a year old as a sacrifice of peace offerings. **<sup>20</sup>** The priest shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits as a wave offering before the LORD, with the two lambs. They shall be holy to the LORD for the priest. **<sup>21</sup>** And you shall make proclamation on that same day; you shall hold a holy convocation. You shall not do any ordinary work. It is a statute forever wherever you live throughout your generations.

**<sup>22</sup>** And when you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not reap your field to its very edge, nor shall you gather the gleanings of your harvest. You shall leave them for the poor and for the foreigner. I am the LORD your God.

**<sup>23</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>24</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, you shall have a solemn rest, a memorial proclaimed with trumpet blast, a holy convocation. **<sup>25</sup>** You shall not do any ordinary work, and you shall present an offering by fire to the LORD.”

**<sup>26</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>27</sup>** “Now on the tenth day of this seventh month is the Day of Atonement. It shall be a holy convocation for you, and you shall humble yourselves and present an offering by fire to the LORD. **<sup>28</sup>** And you shall not do any work on that same day, for it is a Day of Atonement, to make atonement for you before the LORD your God. **<sup>29</sup>** For any person who does not humble himself on that same day shall be cut off from his people. **<sup>30</sup>** And any person who does any work on that same day, I will destroy from among his people. **<sup>31</sup>** You shall not do any work. It is a statute forever throughout your generations wherever you live. **<sup>32</sup>** It shall be to you a Sabbath of solemn rest, and you shall humble yourselves. On the ninth day of the month beginning at evening, from evening to evening you shall keep your Sabbath.”

**<sup>33</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>34</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, On the fifteenth day of this seventh month is the Feast of Booths for seven days to the LORD. **<sup>35</sup>** On the first day shall be a holy convocation; you shall not do any ordinary work. **<sup>36</sup>** For seven days you shall present offerings by fire to the LORD. On the eighth day you shall hold a holy convocation and present an offering by fire to the LORD. It is a solemn assembly; you shall not do any ordinary work.

**<sup>37</sup>** These are the appointed times of the LORD, which you shall proclaim as holy convocations, to present offerings by fire to the LORD—burnt offerings and grain offerings, sacrifices and drink offerings, each on its proper day— **<sup>38</sup>** besides the LORD’s Sabbaths, and besides your gifts and besides all your vow offerings and besides all your freewill offerings that you give to the LORD.

**<sup>39</sup>** On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you have gathered in the produce of the land, you shall celebrate the feast of the LORD for seven days. On the first day shall be a solemn rest, and on the eighth day shall be a solemn rest. **<sup>40</sup>** And you shall take on the first day the fruit of splendid trees, branches of palm trees and boughs of leafy trees and willows of the brook, and you shall rejoice before the LORD your God for seven days. **<sup>41</sup>** You shall celebrate it as a feast to the LORD for seven days in the year. It is a statute forever throughout your generations; you shall celebrate it in the seventh month. **<sup>42</sup>** You shall dwell in booths for seven days. All the native-born in Israel shall dwell in booths, **<sup>43</sup>** that your generations may know that I made the sons of Israel dwell in booths when I brought them out of the land of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.

**<sup>44</sup>** Thus Moses declared to the sons of Israel the appointed times of the LORD. 

## Chapter 24

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Command the sons of Israel to bring to you pure oil from beaten olives for the lamp, to keep a lamp burning continually. **<sup>3</sup>** Outside the veil of the testimony, in the tent of meeting, Aaron shall arrange it continually from evening to morning before the LORD. It shall be a statute forever throughout your generations. **<sup>4</sup>** He shall arrange the lamps on the pure gold lampstand before the LORD continually.

**<sup>5</sup>** You shall take fine flour and bake twelve loaves from it; two tenths of an ephah shall be in each loaf. **<sup>6</sup>** And you shall set them in two rows, six in a row, on the table of pure gold before the LORD. **<sup>7</sup>** You shall put pure frankincense on each row, that it may go with the bread as a memorial portion, as a food offering to the LORD. **<sup>8</sup>** Every Sabbath day Aaron shall arrange it before the LORD regularly; it is from the sons of Israel as a covenant forever. **<sup>9</sup>** And it shall be for Aaron and his sons, and they shall eat it in a holy place, since it is most holy to him from the LORD’s food offerings, a perpetual statute.”

**<sup>10</sup>** Now the son of an Israelite woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the sons of Israel. And the son of the Israelite woman and a certain Israelite man fought together in the camp, **<sup>11</sup>** and the son of the Israelite woman blasphemed the Name and cursed. Then they brought him to Moses. (His mother’s name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.) **<sup>12</sup>** And they put him in custody, till the will of the LORD should be declared to them. **<sup>13</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>14</sup>** “Bring out of the camp the one who cursed, and let all who heard him lay their hands on his head, and let all the congregation stone him. **<sup>15</sup>** And you shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, Whoever curses his God shall bear his sin. **<sup>16</sup>** Whoever blasphemes the name of the LORD shall surely be put to death. All the congregation shall stone him. The foreigner as well as the native, when he blasphemes the Name, shall be put to death.

**<sup>17</sup>** Whoever takes a human life shall surely be put to death. **<sup>18</sup>** Whoever takes an animal’s life shall make it good, life for life. **<sup>19</sup>** If anyone injures his neighbor, as he has done it shall be done to him, **<sup>20</sup>** fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; whatever injury he has given a man shall be given to him. **<sup>21</sup>** Whoever kills an animal shall make it good, and whoever kills a man shall be put to death. **<sup>22</sup>** You shall have the same rule for the foreigner and for the native, for I am the LORD your God.”

**<sup>23</sup>** So Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, and they brought the one who had cursed out of the camp and stoned him with stones. Thus the sons of Israel did as the LORD commanded Moses. 

## Chapter 25

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, When you come into the land that I give you, then the land shall keep a Sabbath to the LORD. **<sup>3</sup>** For six years you shall sow your field, and for six years you shall prune your vineyard and gather in its fruits, **<sup>4</sup>** but in the seventh year there shall be a Sabbath of solemn rest for the land, a Sabbath to the LORD. You shall not sow your field or prune your vineyard. **<sup>5</sup>** You shall not reap what grows of itself in your harvest, nor gather the grapes of your undressed vine. It shall be a year of solemn rest for the land. **<sup>6</sup>** The Sabbath of the land shall provide food for you—for yourself and for your male and female slaves and for your hired worker and the foreigner who lives with you, **<sup>7</sup>** and for your cattle and for the wild animals that are in your land—all its yield shall be for food.

**<sup>8</sup>** You shall count seven weeks of years, seven times seven years, so that the time of the seven weeks of years shall be forty-nine years. **<sup>9</sup>** Then you shall sound the loud trumpet on the tenth day of the seventh month. On the Day of Atonement you shall sound the trumpet throughout all your land. **<sup>10</sup>** And you shall consecrate the fiftieth year and proclaim liberty throughout the land to all its inhabitants. It shall be a jubilee for you, when each of you shall return to his property and each of you shall return to his clan. **<sup>11</sup>** That fiftieth year shall be a jubilee for you; in it you shall neither sow nor reap what grows of itself nor gather the grapes from the undressed vines. **<sup>12</sup>** For it is a jubilee. It shall be holy to you. You may eat the produce of the field.

**<sup>13</sup>** In this year of jubilee each of you shall return to his property. **<sup>14</sup>** And if you make a sale to your neighbor or buy from your neighbor, you shall not wrong one another. **<sup>15</sup>** You shall pay your neighbor according to the number of years after the jubilee, and he shall sell to you according to the number of years for crops. **<sup>16</sup>** If the years are many, you shall increase the price, and if the years are few, you shall reduce the price, for it is the number of the crops that he is selling to you. **<sup>17</sup>** You shall not wrong one another, but you shall fear your God, for I am the LORD your God.

**<sup>18</sup>** Therefore you shall do my statutes and keep my rules and perform them, and then you will dwell in the land securely. **<sup>19</sup>** The land will yield its fruit, and you will eat your fill and dwell in it securely. **<sup>20</sup>** And if you say, ‘What shall we eat in the seventh year, if we may not sow or gather our crop?’ **<sup>21</sup>** I will command my blessing on you in the sixth year, so that it will produce a crop sufficient for three years. **<sup>22</sup>** When you sow in the eighth year, you will be eating some of the old crop; you shall eat the old until the ninth year, when its crop arrives.

**<sup>23</sup>** The land shall not be sold in perpetuity, for the land is mine. For you are strangers and foreigners with me. **<sup>24</sup>** And in all the country you possess, you shall allow a redemption of the land.

**<sup>25</sup>** If your brother becomes poor and sells part of his property, then his nearest redeemer shall come and redeem what his brother has sold. **<sup>26</sup>** If a man has no one to redeem it and then himself becomes prosperous and finds sufficient means to redeem it, **<sup>27</sup>** let him calculate the years since he sold it and pay back the balance to the man to whom he sold it, and then return to his property. **<sup>28</sup>** But if he does not have sufficient means to recover it, then what he sold shall remain in the hand of the buyer until the year of jubilee. In the jubilee it shall be released, and he shall return to his property.

**<sup>29</sup>** If a man sells a dwelling house in a walled city, he may redeem it within a year of its sale. For a full year he shall have the right of redemption. **<sup>30</sup>** If it is not redeemed within a full year, then the house in the walled city shall belong in perpetuity to the buyer throughout his generations. It shall not be released in the jubilee. **<sup>31</sup>** But the houses of the villages that have no wall around them shall be considered as open country. They may be redeemed, and they shall be released in the jubilee.

**<sup>32</sup>** As for the cities of the Levites, the Levites may redeem at any time the houses in the cities they possess. **<sup>33</sup>** And if one of the Levites exercises his right of redemption, then the house that was sold in a city they possess shall be released in the jubilee. For the houses in the cities of the Levites are their possession among the sons of Israel. **<sup>34</sup>** But the fields of pasture land belonging to their cities may not be sold, for that is their perpetual possession.

**<sup>35</sup>** If your brother becomes poor and cannot maintain himself with you, you shall support him as though he were a stranger and a foreigner, and he shall live with you. **<sup>36</sup>** Take no interest from him or profit, but fear your God, that your brother may live beside you. **<sup>37</sup>** You shall not lend him your money at interest, nor give him your food for profit. **<sup>38</sup>** I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to give you the land of Canaan, and to be your God.

**<sup>39</sup>** If your brother becomes poor beside you and sells himself to you, you shall not make him serve as a slave. **<sup>40</sup>** He shall be with you as a hired worker and as a foreigner. He shall serve with you until the year of jubilee. **<sup>41</sup>** Then he shall go out from you, he and his children with him, and go back to his own clan and return to the possession of his fathers. **<sup>42</sup>** For they are my servants, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. They shall not be sold as slaves. **<sup>43</sup>** You shall not rule over him ruthlessly but shall fear your God.

**<sup>44</sup>** As for your male and female slaves whom you may have—you may buy male and female slaves from among the nations that are around you. **<sup>45</sup>** You may also buy from among the sons of the foreigners who live among you and from their clans that are with you, who have been born in your land, and they may be your property. **<sup>46</sup>** You may bequeath them to your sons after you to inherit as a possession forever. You may make slaves of them, but over your brothers the sons of Israel you shall not rule, one over another, ruthlessly.

**<sup>47</sup>** If a stranger or foreigner with you becomes rich, and your brother beside him becomes poor and sells himself to the stranger or foreigner with you or to a member of the stranger’s clan, **<sup>48</sup>** then after he is sold he may be redeemed. One of his brothers may redeem him, **<sup>49</sup>** or his uncle or his cousin may redeem him, or a close relative from his clan may redeem him. Or if he grows rich, he may redeem himself. **<sup>50</sup>** He shall calculate with his buyer from the year when he sold himself to him until the year of jubilee, and the price of his sale shall be in proportion to the number of years. The time he was with his owner shall be rated as the time of a hired worker. **<sup>51</sup>** If there are still many years left, he shall pay proportionately for his redemption out of the money that he was bought for. **<sup>52</sup>** If there remain but a few years until the year of jubilee, he shall calculate and pay for his redemption in proportion to his years of service. **<sup>53</sup>** He shall treat him as a worker hired year by year. He shall not rule ruthlessly over him in your sight.

**<sup>54</sup>** And if he is not redeemed by these means, then he and his children with him shall be released in the year of jubilee. **<sup>55</sup>** For it is to me that the sons of Israel are servants. They are my servants, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. I am the LORD your God. 

## Chapter 26

**<sup>1</sup>** You shall not make idols for yourselves, nor shall you set up a carved image or a pillar for yourselves, nor shall you place a figured stone in your land to bow down to it, for I am the LORD your God. **<sup>2</sup>** You shall keep my Sabbaths and revere my sanctuary: I am the LORD.

**<sup>3</sup>** If you walk in my statutes and keep my commandments and do them, **<sup>4</sup>** then I will give you your rains in their season, and the land shall yield its produce, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit. **<sup>5</sup>** Your threshing shall overtake the vintage, and the vintage shall overtake the sowing. You shall eat your bread to the full and dwell in your land securely. **<sup>6</sup>** I will give peace in the land, and you shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid. I will remove harmful beasts from the land, and the sword shall not go through your land. **<sup>7</sup>** You shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword. **<sup>8</sup>** Five of you shall chase a hundred, and a hundred of you shall chase ten thousand, and your enemies shall fall before you by the sword. **<sup>9</sup>** I will turn to you and make you fruitful and multiply you, and I will establish my covenant with you. **<sup>10</sup>** You shall eat old store long kept, and you shall clear out the old to make way for the new. **<sup>11</sup>** I will set my dwelling among you, and my soul shall not abhor you. **<sup>12</sup>** And I will walk among you and will be your God, and you shall be my people. **<sup>13</sup>** I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, that you should not be their slaves. And I have broken the bars of your yoke and made you walk upright.

**<sup>14</sup>** But if you will not listen to me and will not do all these commandments, **<sup>15</sup>** if you spurn my statutes, and if your soul abhors my rules so that you will not do all my commandments, but break my covenant, **<sup>16</sup>** then I will do this to you: I will visit you with panic, with wasting disease and fever that consume the eyes and make the heart ache. And you shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it. **<sup>17</sup>** I will set my face against you, and you shall be struck down before your enemies. Those who hate you shall rule over you, and you shall flee when none pursues you.

**<sup>18</sup>** And if in spite of this you will not listen to me, then I will discipline you again sevenfold for your sins, **<sup>19</sup>** and I will break the pride of your power, and I will make your heavens like iron and your earth like bronze. **<sup>20</sup>** And your strength shall be spent in vain, for your land shall not yield its increase, and the trees of the land shall not yield their fruit.

**<sup>21</sup>** Then if you walk contrary to me and will not listen to me, I will continue striking you, sevenfold for your sins. **<sup>22</sup>** And I will let loose the wild beasts against you, which shall bereave you of your children and destroy your livestock and make you few in number, so that your roads shall be deserted.

**<sup>23</sup>** And if by this discipline you are not turned to me but walk contrary to me, **<sup>24</sup>** then I also will walk contrary to you, and I myself will strike you sevenfold for your sins. **<sup>25</sup>** And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall execute vengeance for the covenant. And if you gather within your cities, I will send pestilence among you, and you shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy. **<sup>26</sup>** When I break your supply of bread, ten women shall bake your bread in a single oven and shall dole out your bread again by weight, and you shall eat and not be satisfied.

**<sup>27</sup>** But if in spite of this you will not listen to me, but walk contrary to me, **<sup>28</sup>** then I will walk contrary to you in fury, and I myself will discipline you sevenfold for your sins. **<sup>29</sup>** You shall eat the flesh of your sons, and you shall eat the flesh of your daughters. **<sup>30</sup>** And I will destroy your high places and cut down your incense altars and cast your dead bodies upon the dead bodies of your idols, and my soul will abhor you. **<sup>31</sup>** And I will lay your cities waste and will make your sanctuaries desolate, and I will not smell your pleasing aromas. **<sup>32</sup>** And I myself will devastate the land, so that your enemies who settle in it shall be appalled at it. **<sup>33</sup>** And I will scatter you among the nations, and I will unsheathe the sword after you. Your land shall be a desolation, and your cities shall be a waste.

**<sup>34</sup>** Then the land shall enjoy its Sabbaths as long as it lies desolate, while you are in your enemies’ land; then the land shall rest and enjoy its Sabbaths. **<sup>35</sup>** As long as it lies desolate it shall have rest, the rest that it did not have on your Sabbaths when you were dwelling in it. **<sup>36</sup>** And as for those of you who are left, I will send faintness into their hearts in the lands of their enemies. The sound of a driven leaf shall put them to flight, and they shall flee as one flees from the sword, and they shall fall when none pursues. **<sup>37</sup>** They shall stumble over one another, as if to escape a sword, though none pursues. And you shall have no power to stand before your enemies. **<sup>38</sup>** And you shall perish among the nations, and the land of your enemies shall eat you up. **<sup>39</sup>** And those of you who are left shall rot away in your enemies’ lands because of their iniquity, and also because of the iniquities of their fathers they shall rot away like them.

**<sup>40</sup>** But if they confess their iniquity and the iniquity of their fathers in their treachery that they committed against me, and also in walking contrary to me, **<sup>41</sup>** so that I walked contrary to them and brought them into the land of their enemies—if then their uncircumcised heart is humbled and they make amends for their iniquity, **<sup>42</sup>** then I will remember my covenant with Jacob, and I will remember my covenant with Isaac and my covenant with Abraham, and I will remember the land. **<sup>43</sup>** But the land shall be abandoned by them and enjoy its Sabbaths while it lies desolate without them, and they shall make amends for their iniquity, because they spurned my rules and their soul abhorred my statutes. **<sup>44</sup>** Yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not spurn them, neither will I abhor them so as to destroy them utterly and break my covenant with them, for I am the LORD their God. **<sup>45</sup>** But, for their sake, I will remember the covenant with their forefathers, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the nations, that I might be their God: I am the LORD.

**<sup>46</sup>** These are the statutes and rules and laws that the LORD made between himself and the sons of Israel through Moses on Mount Sinai. 

## Chapter 27

**<sup>1</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, When a man makes a special vow, the persons shall be for the LORD by your valuation.

**<sup>3</sup>** If your valuation is for a male from twenty years old up to sixty years old, then your valuation shall be fifty shekels of silver, according to the shekel of the sanctuary. **<sup>4</sup>** If it is a female, then your valuation shall be thirty shekels. **<sup>5</sup>** And if from five years old up to twenty years old, your valuation shall be for a male twenty shekels, and for a female ten shekels. **<sup>6</sup>** And if from a month old up to five years old, your valuation shall be for a male five shekels of silver, and for a female your valuation shall be three shekels of silver. **<sup>7</sup>** And if from sixty years old and upward, if it is a male, then your valuation shall be fifteen shekels, and for a female ten shekels. **<sup>8</sup>** But if he is poorer than your valuation, then he shall present himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him; the priest shall value him according to what the man who vowed can afford.

**<sup>9</sup>** And if it is a beast of which men bring an offering to the LORD, all that a man gives to the LORD from it shall be holy. **<sup>10</sup>** He shall not exchange it or substitute it, good for bad or bad for good; and if he does substitute beast for beast, then both it and its substitute shall be holy. **<sup>11</sup>** And if it is any unclean beast, of which they may not bring an offering to the LORD, then he shall present the beast before the priest, **<sup>12</sup>** and the priest shall value it, whether it is good or bad; as you, the priest, value it, so it shall be. **<sup>13</sup>** But if he ever wishes to redeem it, then he shall add a fifth to its valuation.

**<sup>14</sup>** When a man dedicates his house as holy to the LORD, the priest shall value it, whether good or bad; as the priest values it, so it shall stand. **<sup>15</sup>** And if the one who dedicates it wishes to redeem his house, then he shall add a fifth of the money of your valuation to it, and it shall be his.

**<sup>16</sup>** And if a man dedicates to the LORD part of the field of his possession, your valuation shall be in proportion to its seed: a homer of barley seed shall be valued at fifty shekels of silver. **<sup>17</sup>** If he dedicates his field from the year of jubilee, it shall stand at your full valuation. **<sup>18</sup>** But if he dedicates his field after the jubilee, then the priest shall calculate the money according to the years that remain until the year of jubilee, and a deduction shall be made from your valuation. **<sup>19</sup>** And if he who dedicates the field wishes to redeem it, then he shall add a fifth of the money of your valuation to it, and it shall be assured to him. **<sup>20</sup>** But if he does not redeem the field, or if he has sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed anymore. **<sup>21</sup>** But the field, when it is released in the jubilee, shall be holy to the LORD, like a devoted field; it shall be the priest’s possession.

**<sup>22</sup>** And if he dedicates to the LORD a field that he has bought, which is not part of the field of his possession, **<sup>23</sup>** then the priest shall calculate for him the amount of your valuation up to the year of jubilee, and the man shall give your valuation on that day as a holy thing to the LORD. **<sup>24</sup>** In the year of jubilee the field shall return to the one from whom it was bought, to whom the possession of the land belongs. **<sup>25</sup>** All your valuations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall make a shekel.

**<sup>26</sup>** But a firstborn of animals, which as a firstborn belongs to the LORD, no man may dedicate; whether ox or sheep, it is the LORD’s. **<sup>27</sup>** But if it is of an unclean beast, then he shall redeem it at your valuation and add a fifth to it; but if it is not redeemed, it shall be sold at your valuation.

**<sup>28</sup>** But nothing that a man devotes to the LORD, of anything that he has, whether man or beast or his inherited field, shall be sold or redeemed; every devoted thing is most holy to the LORD. **<sup>29</sup>** No one devoted, who is devoted for destruction from mankind, shall be ransomed; he shall surely be put to death.

**<sup>30</sup>** Every tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land or of the fruit of the trees, is the LORD’s; it is holy to the LORD. **<sup>31</sup>** If a man wishes to redeem any of his tithe, he shall add a fifth to it. **<sup>32</sup>** And every tithe of herds and flocks, every tenth animal of all that pass under the herdsman’s staff, shall be holy to the LORD. **<sup>33</sup>** One shall not search whether it is good or bad, neither shall he exchange it; and if he does exchange it, then both it and the substitute shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.

**<sup>34</sup>** These are the commandments that the LORD commanded Moses for the sons of Israel on Mount Sinai. 