# The Fourth Book of Moses, called Numbers

## Chapter 1

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tent of meeting, on the first day of the second month, in the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Take a census of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, every male, head by head, **<sup>3</sup>** from twenty years old and upward, everyone in Israel who is able to go out to war. You and Aaron shall number them by their companies. **<sup>4</sup>** And with you there shall be a man from each tribe, each man the head of his fathers’ house. **<sup>5</sup>** And these are the names of the men who shall assist you: from Reuben, Elizur the son of Shedeur; **<sup>6</sup>** from Simeon, Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai; **<sup>7</sup>** from Judah, Nahshon the son of Amminadab; **<sup>8</sup>** from Issachar, Nethanel the son of Zuar; **<sup>9</sup>** from Zebulun, Eliab the son of Helon; **<sup>10</sup>** from the sons of Joseph, from Ephraim, Elishama the son of Ammihud, and from Manasseh, Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur; **<sup>11</sup>** from Benjamin, Abidan the son of Gideoni; **<sup>12</sup>** from Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai; **<sup>13</sup>** from Asher, Pagiel the son of Ochran; **<sup>14</sup>** from Gad, Eliasaph the son of Deuel; **<sup>15</sup>** from Naphtali, Ahira the son of Enan. **<sup>16</sup>** These were the ones called from the congregation, the chiefs of their ancestral tribes, the heads of the clans of Israel.

**<sup>17</sup>** So Moses and Aaron took these men who had been designated by name, **<sup>18</sup>** and on the first day of the second month, they assembled the whole congregation together. They registered themselves by clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, head by head, **<sup>19</sup>** as the LORD commanded Moses. So he counted them in the wilderness of Sinai.

**<sup>20</sup>** The sons of Reuben, Israel’s firstborn, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, head by head, every male from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>21</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Reuben were forty-six thousand five hundred.

**<sup>22</sup>** Of the sons of Simeon, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, those who were counted, according to the number of names, head by head, every male from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>23</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Simeon were fifty-nine thousand three hundred.

**<sup>24</sup>** Of the sons of Gad, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>25</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Gad were forty-five thousand six hundred fifty.

**<sup>26</sup>** Of the sons of Judah, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>27</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Judah were seventy-four thousand six hundred.

**<sup>28</sup>** Of the sons of Issachar, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>29</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Issachar were fifty-four thousand four hundred.

**<sup>30</sup>** Of the sons of Zebulun, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>31</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Zebulun were fifty-seven thousand four hundred.

**<sup>32</sup>** Of the sons of Joseph, namely of the sons of Ephraim, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>33</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Ephraim were forty thousand five hundred.

**<sup>34</sup>** Of the sons of Manasseh, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>35</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Manasseh were thirty-two thousand two hundred.

**<sup>36</sup>** Of the sons of Benjamin, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>37</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Benjamin were thirty-five thousand four hundred.

**<sup>38</sup>** Of the sons of Dan, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>39</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Dan were sixty-two thousand seven hundred.

**<sup>40</sup>** Of the sons of Asher, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>41</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Asher were forty-one thousand five hundred.

**<sup>42</sup>** Of the sons of Naphtali, their generations, by their clans, by their fathers’ houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war: **<sup>43</sup>** those listed of the tribe of Naphtali were fifty-three thousand four hundred.

**<sup>44</sup>** These are those who were listed, whom Moses and Aaron listed with the twelve chiefs of Israel, each representing his fathers’ house. **<sup>45</sup>** So all those listed of the sons of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, every man able to go out to war in Israel— **<sup>46</sup>** all those who were listed were six hundred three thousand five hundred fifty.

**<sup>47</sup>** But the Levites, according to the tribe of their fathers, were not listed among them. **<sup>48</sup>** For the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>49</sup>** “Only the tribe of Levi you shall not list, and you shall not take their census among the sons of Israel. **<sup>50</sup>** But appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of the testimony, and over all its furnishings, and over all that belongs to it. They shall carry the tabernacle and all its furnishings, and they shall take care of it and camp around the tabernacle. **<sup>51</sup>** When the tabernacle is set out, the Levites shall take it down, and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up. But any outsider who comes near shall be put to death. **<sup>52</sup>** The sons of Israel shall pitch their tents, each man by his own camp and each man by his own standard, according to their hosts. **<sup>53</sup>** But the Levites shall camp around the tabernacle of the testimony, so that there may be no wrath on the congregation of the sons of Israel. And the Levites shall keep guard over the tabernacle of the testimony.” **<sup>54</sup>** Thus the sons of Israel did; according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so they did. 

## Chapter 2

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “The sons of Israel shall camp, each by his own standard, with the banners of their fathers’ houses. They shall camp facing the tent of meeting on every side.

**<sup>3</sup>** Those who camp on the east side, toward the sunrise, shall be of the standard of the camp of Judah by their companies, and the leader of the sons of Judah shall be Nahshon the son of Amminadab, **<sup>4</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were seventy-four thousand six hundred. **<sup>5</sup>** Those who camp next to him shall be the tribe of Issachar, and the leader of the sons of Issachar shall be Nethanel the son of Zuar, **<sup>6</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were fifty-four thousand four hundred. **<sup>7</sup>** Then the tribe of Zebulun, and the leader of the sons of Zebulun shall be Eliab the son of Helon, **<sup>8</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were fifty-seven thousand four hundred. **<sup>9</sup>** All those listed of the camp of Judah, by their companies, were one hundred eighty-six thousand four hundred. They shall set out first on the march.

**<sup>10</sup>** On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben by their companies, and the leader of the sons of Reuben shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur, **<sup>11</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were forty-six thousand five hundred. **<sup>12</sup>** And those who camp next to him shall be the tribe of Simeon, and the leader of the sons of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, **<sup>13</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were fifty-nine thousand three hundred. **<sup>14</sup>** Then the tribe of Gad, and the leader of the sons of Gad shall be Eliasaph the son of Reuel, **<sup>15</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were forty-five thousand six hundred fifty. **<sup>16</sup>** All those listed of the camp of Reuben, by their companies, were one hundred fifty-one thousand four hundred fifty. They shall set out second.

**<sup>17</sup>** Then the tent of meeting shall set out, with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camps. As they camp, so shall they set out, each in position, standard by standard.

**<sup>18</sup>** On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim by their companies, and the leader of the sons of Ephraim shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud, **<sup>19</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were forty thousand five hundred. **<sup>20</sup>** And next to him shall be the tribe of Manasseh, and the leader of the sons of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, **<sup>21</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were thirty-two thousand two hundred. **<sup>22</sup>** Then the tribe of Benjamin, and the leader of the sons of Benjamin shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni, **<sup>23</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were thirty-five thousand four hundred. **<sup>24</sup>** All those listed of the camp of Ephraim, by their companies, were one hundred eight thousand one hundred. They shall set out third on the march.

**<sup>25</sup>** On the north side shall be the standard of the camp of Dan by their companies, and the leader of the sons of Dan shall be Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, **<sup>26</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were sixty-two thousand seven hundred. **<sup>27</sup>** And those who camp next to him shall be the tribe of Asher, and the leader of the sons of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ochran, **<sup>28</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were forty-one thousand five hundred. **<sup>29</sup>** Then the tribe of Naphtali, and the leader of the sons of Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan, **<sup>30</sup>** and his company, as those who were listed, were fifty-three thousand four hundred. **<sup>31</sup>** All those listed of the camp of Dan were one hundred fifty-seven thousand six hundred. They shall set out last, standard by standard.

**<sup>32</sup>** These are those who were listed of the sons of Israel by their fathers’ houses. All those listed of the camps by their companies were six hundred three thousand five hundred fifty. **<sup>33</sup>** But the Levites were not listed among the sons of Israel, as the LORD commanded Moses. **<sup>34</sup>** Thus the sons of Israel did according to all that the LORD commanded Moses. So they camped by their standards, and so they set out, each one by his clan, according to his fathers’ house. 

## Chapter 3

**<sup>1</sup>** These are the generations of Aaron and Moses at the time when the LORD spoke with Moses on Mount Sinai. **<sup>2</sup>** These are the names of the sons of Aaron: Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. **<sup>3</sup>** These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the anointed priests, whom he consecrated to serve as priests.

**<sup>4</sup>** But Nadab and Abihu died before the LORD when they offered unauthorized fire before the LORD in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no sons. So Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests under the authority of Aaron, their father.

**<sup>5</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>6</sup>** “Bring the tribe of Levi near, and set them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister to him. **<sup>7</sup>** They shall serve him, and serve the whole congregation before the tent of meeting, to perform the service of the tabernacle. **<sup>8</sup>** And they shall take care of all the furnishings of the tent of meeting and attend to the duties for the sons of Israel, to perform the service of the tabernacle. **<sup>9</sup>** You shall give the Levites to Aaron and to his sons; they are wholly given to him from among the sons of Israel. **<sup>10</sup>** You shall appoint Aaron and his sons, that they may keep their priesthood; but the outsider who comes near shall be put to death.”

**<sup>11</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>12</sup>** “Behold, I have taken the Levites from among the sons of Israel instead of every firstborn, the first to open the womb among the sons of Israel. So the Levites shall be mine, **<sup>13</sup>** for all the firstborn are mine. On the day that I struck down all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, I consecrated to myself all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast. They shall be mine. I am the LORD.”

**<sup>14</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying, **<sup>15</sup>** “Count the sons of Levi by their fathers’ households, by their clans; every male from one month old and upward you shall count.” **<sup>16</sup>** So Moses counted them according to the word of the LORD, just as he had been commanded.

**<sup>17</sup>** These were the sons of Levi by their names: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. **<sup>18</sup>** These are the names of the sons of Gershon by their clans: Libni and Shimei. **<sup>19</sup>** The sons of Kohath by their clans: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. **<sup>20</sup>** The sons of Merari by their clans: Mahli and Mushi. These are the clans of the Levites according to their fathers’ households.

**<sup>21</sup>** Of Gershon were the clan of the Libnites and the clan of the Shimeites; these were the clans of the Gershonites. **<sup>22</sup>** Their numbered males, from one month old and upward, numbered seven thousand five hundred. **<sup>23</sup>** The clans of the Gershonites were to camp behind the tabernacle to the west, **<sup>24</sup>** and the leader of the fathers’ household of the Gershonites was Eliasaph the son of Lael. **<sup>25</sup>** The duties of the sons of Gershon in the tent of meeting included the tabernacle and the tent, its covering, the screen for the doorway of the tent of meeting, **<sup>26</sup>** the hangings of the court, the screen for the doorway of the court which is around the tabernacle and the altar, and its ropes, and all the service concerning these items.

**<sup>27</sup>** Of Kohath were the clan of the Amramites, the clan of the Izharites, the clan of the Hebronites, and the clan of the Uzzielites; these were the clans of the Kohathites. **<sup>28</sup>** The number of all the males from one month old and upward was eight thousand six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary. **<sup>29</sup>** The clans of the sons of Kohath were to camp on the south side of the tabernacle, **<sup>30</sup>** and the leader of the fathers’ household of the Kohathite clans was Elizaphan the son of Uzziel. **<sup>31</sup>** Their duties included the ark, the table, the lampstand, the altars, the utensils of the sanctuary with which they minister, the screen, and all the service concerning these items. **<sup>32</sup>** Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest was the chief over the leaders of the Levites and had the oversight of those performing the duties of the sanctuary.

**<sup>33</sup>** Of Merari were the clan of the Mahlites and the clan of the Mushites; these were the clans of Merari. **<sup>34</sup>** Their numbered males from one month old and upward were six thousand two hundred. **<sup>35</sup>** The leader of the fathers’ household of the clans of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail; they were to camp on the north side of the tabernacle. **<sup>36</sup>** The appointed duties of the sons of Merari included the frames of the tabernacle, its bars, its pillars, its bases, all its equipment, and the service concerning these items, **<sup>37</sup>** and the pillars around the court with their bases and their pegs and their cords.

**<sup>38</sup>** Now those who were to camp before the tabernacle to the east, before the tent of meeting toward the sunrise, were Moses and Aaron and his sons, performing the duties of the sanctuary for the obligation of the sons of Israel; but the outsider who came near was to be put to death.

**<sup>39</sup>** All the numbered Levites, whom Moses and Aaron counted at the command of the LORD by their clans, every male from one month old and upward, were twenty-two thousand.

**<sup>40</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Count every firstborn male of the sons of Israel from one month old and upward, and make a list of their names. **<sup>41</sup>** You shall take the Levites for me—I am the LORD—instead of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the cattle of the sons of Israel.”

**<sup>42</sup>** So Moses counted all the firstborn among the sons of Israel, just as the LORD had commanded him, **<sup>43</sup>** and all the firstborn males by the number of names from one month old and upward, for their numbered men, were twenty-two thousand two hundred seventy-three.

**<sup>44</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>45</sup>** “Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle. So the Levites shall be mine. I am the LORD. **<sup>46</sup>** And as the redemption price for the two hundred seventy-three of the firstborn of the sons of Israel who are beyond the number of the Levites, **<sup>47</sup>** you shall take five shekels per person; you shall take them according to the shekel of the sanctuary (the shekel is twenty gerahs), **<sup>48</sup>** and give the money, the redemption price of those who are in excess among them, to Aaron and to his sons.”

**<sup>49</sup>** So Moses took the redemption money from those who were in excess beyond those redeemed by the Levites. **<sup>50</sup>** He took the money from the firstborn of the sons of Israel, one thousand three hundred sixty-five shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary. **<sup>51</sup>** Then Moses gave the redemption money to Aaron and to his sons, according to the word of the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. 

## Chapter 4

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Take a census of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, by their clans, by their fathers’ households, **<sup>3</sup>** from thirty years old and upward, even to fifty years old, all who enter the service to perform the work in the tent of meeting. **<sup>4</sup>** This is the service of the sons of Kohath in the tent of meeting, regarding the most holy things.

**<sup>5</sup>** When the camp sets out, Aaron and his sons shall go in and take down the veil of the screen and cover the ark of the testimony with it. **<sup>6</sup>** They shall place over it a covering of fine leather, and spread over that a cloth of pure blue, and insert its poles. **<sup>7</sup>** Over the table of the bread of the Presence they shall spread a blue cloth and put on it the dishes and the pans and the bowls and the jars for the drink offering, and the continual bread shall be on it. **<sup>8</sup>** They shall spread over them a scarlet cloth, and cover the same with a covering of fine leather, and insert its poles. **<sup>9</sup>** Then they shall take a blue cloth and cover the lampstand for the light, along with its lamps, its tongs, its trays, and all its oil vessels, by which they serve it. **<sup>10</sup>** And they shall put it and all its utensils into a covering of fine leather and put it on the carrying frame. **<sup>11</sup>** Over the golden altar they shall spread a blue cloth and cover it with a covering of fine leather, and insert its poles. **<sup>12</sup>** Then they shall take all the utensils of the service with which they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a blue cloth and cover them with a covering of fine leather, and put them on the carrying frame. **<sup>13</sup>** They shall also clean the ashes from the altar and spread a purple cloth over it. **<sup>14</sup>** They shall put on it all its utensils by which they minister there, the fire pans, the forks, the shovels, and the basins, all the utensils of the altar; and they shall spread over it a covering of fine leather and insert its poles.

**<sup>15</sup>** When Aaron and his sons have finished covering the holy items and all the furnishings of the sanctuary, when the camp is to set out, then the sons of Kohath shall come to carry them, so that they will not touch the holy objects and die. These are the duties of the sons of Kohath in the tent of meeting. **<sup>16</sup>** But the oversight of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be over the oil for the light, the fragrant incense, the continual grain offering, and the anointing oil—the oversight of all the tabernacle and all that is in it, with the sanctuary and its furnishings.”

**<sup>17</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, **<sup>18</sup>** “Do not let the tribe of the families of the Kohathites be cut off from among the Levites. **<sup>19</sup>** But do this for them so that they will live and not die when they approach the most holy items: Aaron and his sons shall go in and assign each of them to his service and to his load. **<sup>20</sup>** But they shall not go in to see the holy items even for a moment, or they will die.”

**<sup>21</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>22</sup>** “Take a census of the sons of Gershon also, by their fathers’ households, by their clans. **<sup>23</sup>** From thirty years old and upward to fifty years old you shall number them, all who come to serve to do the work in the tent of meeting. **<sup>24</sup>** This is the service of the clans of the Gershonites, in serving and in carrying: **<sup>25</sup>** they shall carry the curtains of the tabernacle and the tent of meeting, its covering and the covering of fine leather that is on top of it, and the screen for the doorway of the tent of meeting, **<sup>26</sup>** and the hangings of the courtyard, and the screen for the entrance of the gate of the courtyard which is around the tabernacle and the altar, and their ropes and all the equipment for their service; and all that is to be done, they shall perform. **<sup>27</sup>** At the command of Aaron and his sons all the service of the sons of the Gershonites shall be in regard to all their duties and in regard to all their carrying; and you shall assign their duties to them as their responsibility. **<sup>28</sup>** This is the service of the clans of the sons of the Gershonites in the tent of meeting; and their duties shall be under the direction of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

**<sup>29</sup>** As for the sons of Merari, you shall number them by their clans, by their fathers’ households; **<sup>30</sup>** from thirty years old and upward to fifty years old you shall number them, everyone who enters the service to do the work of the tent of meeting. **<sup>31</sup>** Now this is the duty of their loads, according to all their service in the tent of meeting: the boards of the tabernacle and its crossbars and its pillars and its bases, **<sup>32</sup>** and the pillars around the courtyard with their bases and their pegs and their ropes, with all their equipment and with all their service; and you shall assign each man by name the items he is to carry. **<sup>33</sup>** This is the service of the clans of the sons of Merari, according to all their service in the tent of meeting, under the direction of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.”

**<sup>34</sup>** So Moses and Aaron and the leaders of the congregation counted the sons of the Kohathites by their clans and by their fathers’ households, **<sup>35</sup>** from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, everyone who entered the service for the work in the tent of meeting. **<sup>36</sup>** Their numbered men by their clans were two thousand seven hundred fifty. **<sup>37</sup>** These were the men counted in the clans of the Kohathites, all who served in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron counted according to the command of the LORD through Moses.

**<sup>38</sup>** And the numbered men of the sons of Gershon by their clans and by their fathers’ households, **<sup>39</sup>** from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, everyone who entered the service for the work in the tent of meeting— **<sup>40</sup>** their numbered men by their clans and by their fathers’ households were two thousand six hundred thirty. **<sup>41</sup>** These were the men counted by clans of the sons of Gershon, everyone who served in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron counted according to the command of the LORD.

**<sup>42</sup>** And the numbered men of the clans of the sons of Merari by their clans and by their fathers’ households, **<sup>43</sup>** from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, everyone who entered the service for the work in the tent of meeting— **<sup>44</sup>** their numbered men by their clans were three thousand two hundred. **<sup>45</sup>** These were the men counted by clans of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron counted according to the command of the LORD through Moses.

**<sup>46</sup>** All the numbered men of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the leaders of Israel counted by their clans and by their fathers’ households, **<sup>47</sup>** from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, everyone who could enter to do the work of service and the work of carrying in the tent of meeting— **<sup>48</sup>** their numbered men were eight thousand five hundred eighty. **<sup>49</sup>** According to the command of the LORD through Moses, they were counted, each man by his service or by his carrying; so these were his numbered men, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. 

## Chapter 5

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Command the sons of Israel that they send away from the camp every leper and everyone with a discharge and everyone who is unclean because of contact with a corpse. **<sup>3</sup>** You shall send both male and female away; you shall send them outside the camp so that they do not defile their camp, where I dwell in their midst.” **<sup>4</sup>** So the sons of Israel did so and sent them outside the camp; just as the LORD had spoken to Moses, so the sons of Israel did.

**<sup>5</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>6</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel: When a man or a woman commits any of the sins of mankind by acting unfaithfully against the LORD, and that person is guilty, **<sup>7</sup>** then he shall confess his sin which he has committed, and he shall make restitution in full for his wrong and add a fifth, and give it to the person whom he wronged. **<sup>8</sup>** But if the man has no redeemer to whom restitution may be made for the wrong, the restitution which is made shall go to the LORD for the priest, besides the ram of atonement by which atonement is made for him. **<sup>9</sup>** Also every contribution pertaining to all the holy gifts of the sons of Israel, which they offer to the priest, shall be his. **<sup>10</sup>** Every man’s holy gifts shall be his; whatever any man gives to the priest, it becomes his.”

**<sup>11</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>12</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘If any man’s wife goes astray and is unfaithful to him, **<sup>13</sup>** and a man has sexual relations with her, and it is hidden from the eyes of her husband and she is undetected, although she has defiled herself, and there is no witness against her and she has not been caught in the act, **<sup>14</sup>** and a spirit of jealousy comes over him and he is jealous of his wife when she has defiled herself, or a spirit of jealousy comes over him and he is jealous of his wife when she has not defiled herself, **<sup>15</sup>** then the man shall bring his wife to the priest, and shall bring as her offering for her one-tenth of an ephah of barley flour; he shall not pour oil on it nor put frankincense on it, for it is a grain offering of jealousy, a grain offering of memorial, a reminder of wrongdoing.

**<sup>16</sup>** Then the priest shall bring her forward and have her stand before the LORD, **<sup>17</sup>** and the priest shall take holy water in an earthenware vessel; and he shall take some of the dust that is on the floor of the tabernacle and put it into the water. **<sup>18</sup>** Then the priest shall have the woman stand before the LORD and let the hair of the woman’s head go loose, and place the grain offering of memorial in her hands, which is the grain offering of jealousy; and the water of bitterness that brings a curse shall be in the hand of the priest. **<sup>19</sup>** And the priest shall have her take an oath and shall say to the woman, ‘If no man has lain with you, and if you have not been unfaithful while under your husband’s authority, be immune to this water of bitterness that brings a curse. **<sup>20</sup>** But if you have gone astray, though under your husband’s authority, and if you have defiled yourself and a man other than your husband has had intercourse with you’— **<sup>21</sup>** then the priest shall have the woman swear with the oath of the curse, and the priest shall say to the woman—‘may the LORD make you a curse and an oath among your people by the LORD’S making your thigh waste away and your abdomen swell; **<sup>22</sup>** and this water that brings a curse will go into your stomach and make your abdomen swell and your thigh waste away.’ And the woman shall say, ‘Amen. Amen.’

**<sup>23</sup>** Then the priest shall write these curses on a scroll and wash them off into the water of bitterness. **<sup>24</sup>** And he shall make the woman drink the water of bitterness that brings a curse, so that the water which brings a curse will go into her and cause bitterness. **<sup>25</sup>** And the priest shall take the grain offering of jealousy from the woman’s hand, and he shall wave the grain offering before the LORD and bring it to the altar; **<sup>26</sup>** and the priest shall take a handful of the grain offering as its memorial portion and offer it up in smoke on the altar, and afterward he shall make the woman drink the water. **<sup>27</sup>** When he has made her drink the water, then it will come about that, if she has defiled herself and has committed an act of unfaithfulness against her husband, the water which brings a curse will go into her and cause bitterness, and her abdomen will swell and her thigh will waste away, and the woman will become a curse among her people. **<sup>28</sup>** But if the woman has not defiled herself and is clean, she will be immune and will be able to conceive children.

**<sup>29</sup>** This is the law of jealousy: when a wife, though under her husband’s authority, goes astray and defiles herself, **<sup>30</sup>** or when a spirit of jealousy comes over a man and he is jealous of his wife, he shall then have the woman stand before the LORD, and the priest shall carry out all this law for her. **<sup>31</sup>** Moreover, the man will be free of guilt, but that woman shall bear her guilt. 

## Chapter 6

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘When a man or a woman makes a special vow, the vow of a Nazirite, to dedicate himself to the LORD, **<sup>3</sup>** he shall abstain from wine and strong drink; he shall drink no vinegar, whether made from wine or strong drink, nor shall he drink any grape juice nor eat fresh or dried grapes. **<sup>4</sup>** All the days of his dedication he shall not eat anything that comes from the grapevine, from the seeds, to the skin.

**<sup>5</sup>** All the days of his vow of dedication, no razor shall pass over his head. Until the days are fulfilled for which he dedicated himself to the LORD, he shall be holy; he shall let the locks of hair on his head grow long. **<sup>6</sup>** All the days of his dedication to the LORD he shall not go near a dead person. **<sup>7</sup>** He shall not defile himself even for his father or for his mother or for his brother or sister when they die, because his dedication to God is on his head. **<sup>8</sup>** All the days of his dedication he is holy to the LORD.

**<sup>9</sup>** But if someone dies very suddenly beside him and he defiles his dedicated head, then he shall shave his head on the day he becomes clean; on the seventh day he shall shave it. **<sup>10</sup>** Then on the eighth day he shall bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>11</sup>** The priest shall offer one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering and make atonement for him concerning his sin because of the dead person. And he shall consecrate his head on that same day. **<sup>12</sup>** He shall dedicate to the LORD the days of his dedication and shall bring a male lamb a year old for a guilt offering. But the former days will be void because his dedication was defiled.

**<sup>13</sup>** Now this is the law of the Nazirite when the days of his dedication are fulfilled: he shall bring his offering to the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>14</sup>** He shall offer his gift to the LORD: one unblemished male lamb a year old as a burnt offering, and one unblemished ewe lamb a year old as a sin offering, and one unblemished ram as a peace offering, **<sup>15</sup>** and a basket of unleavened loaves of fine flour mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, along with their grain offering and their drink offerings. **<sup>16</sup>** Then the priest shall present them before the LORD and offer his sin offering and his burnt offering. **<sup>17</sup>** He shall also offer the ram as a sacrifice of peace offerings to the LORD, with the basket of unleavened bread. The priest shall likewise offer its grain offering and its drink offering. **<sup>18</sup>** The Nazirite shall then shave his dedicated head at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and take the hair of his dedicated head and put it on the fire which is under the sacrifice of peace offerings. **<sup>19</sup>** The priest shall take the boiled shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened loaf from the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall put them on the hands of the Nazirite after he has shaved his dedicated hair. **<sup>20</sup>** Then the priest shall wave them as a wave offering before the LORD; it is holy for the priest, together with the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the contribution. Afterward the Nazirite may drink wine.

**<sup>21</sup>** This is the law of the Nazirite who vows his offering to the LORD according to his dedication, in addition to what he can afford. In accordance with the vow which he takes, so he shall do according to the law of his dedication.”

**<sup>22</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>23</sup>** “Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying, ‘This is how you shall bless the sons of Israel. You shall say to them:

**<sup>24</sup>** The LORD bless you and keep you; **<sup>25</sup>** The LORD make His face shine on you and be gracious to you; **<sup>26</sup>** The LORD lift up His face to you and give you peace.’

**<sup>27</sup>** So they shall invoke My name on the sons of Israel, and I will bless them.” 

## Chapter 7

**<sup>1</sup>** On the day Moses finished setting up the tabernacle, he anointed and consecrated it with all its furnishings, as well as the altar and all its utensils; he anointed and consecrated them. **<sup>2</sup>** Then the leaders of Israel, the heads of their ancestral houses, who were the tribal chiefs over those who had been counted, brought offerings. **<sup>3</sup>** They brought their offerings before the LORD: six covered carts and twelve oxen—one cart for every two leaders and one ox for each—and they presented them before the tabernacle. **<sup>4</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, **<sup>5</sup>** “Accept these from them for use in the service of the tent of meeting, and give them to the Levites, each according to the service to which he is assigned.” **<sup>6</sup>** So Moses took the carts and the oxen and gave them to the Levites. **<sup>7</sup>** He gave two carts and four oxen to the sons of Gershon, according to their service. **<sup>8</sup>** And he gave four carts and eight oxen to the sons of Merari, according to their service, under the direction of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest. **<sup>9</sup>** But to the sons of Kohath he gave none, because their service was to carry on the shoulder the holy things for which they were responsible.

**<sup>10</sup>** The leaders brought their dedication offerings for the altar when it was anointed, and the leaders presented their offerings before the altar. **<sup>11</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Let them present their offerings, one leader per day, for the dedication of the altar.”

**<sup>12</sup>** On the first day Nahshon, son of Amminadab of the tribe of Judah, brought his offering. **<sup>13</sup>** His offering was one silver dish weighing 130 shekels, one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; **<sup>14</sup>** one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; **<sup>15</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering; **<sup>16</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering; **<sup>17</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Nahshon, son of Amminadab.

**<sup>18</sup>** On the second day Nethanel, son of Zuar, the leader of Issachar, brought his offering. **<sup>19</sup>** He brought one silver dish weighing 130 shekels, one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel, both filled with fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; **<sup>20</sup>** one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; **<sup>21</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering; **<sup>22</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering; **<sup>23</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Nethanel, son of Zuar.

**<sup>24</sup>** On the third day Eliab, son of Helon, the leader of the sons of Zebulun, brought his offering. **<sup>25</sup>** His offering was one silver plate weighing 130 shekels and one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, **<sup>26</sup>** one golden dish of ten shekels, full of incense, **<sup>27</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering, **<sup>28</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering, **<sup>29</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Eliab, son of Helon.

**<sup>30</sup>** On the fourth day Elizur, son of Shedeur, the leader of the sons of Reuben, brought his offering. **<sup>31</sup>** His offering was one silver plate weighing 130 shekels and one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, **<sup>32</sup>** one golden dish of ten shekels, full of incense, **<sup>33</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering, **<sup>34</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering, **<sup>35</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Elizur, son of Shedeur.

**<sup>36</sup>** On the fifth day Shelumiel, son of Zurishaddai, the leader of the sons of Simeon, brought his offering. **<sup>37</sup>** His offering was one silver plate weighing 130 shekels and one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, **<sup>38</sup>** one golden dish of ten shekels, full of incense, **<sup>39</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering, **<sup>40</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering, **<sup>41</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Shelumiel, son of Zurishaddai.

**<sup>42</sup>** On the sixth day Eliasaph, son of Deuel, the leader of the sons of Gad, brought his offering. **<sup>43</sup>** His offering was one silver plate weighing 130 shekels and one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, **<sup>44</sup>** one golden dish of ten shekels, full of incense, **<sup>45</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering, **<sup>46</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering, **<sup>47</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Eliasaph, son of Deuel.

**<sup>48</sup>** On the seventh day Elishama, son of Ammihud, the leader of the sons of Ephraim, brought his offering. **<sup>49</sup>** His offering was one silver plate weighing 130 shekels and one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, **<sup>50</sup>** one golden dish of ten shekels, full of incense, **<sup>51</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering, **<sup>52</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering, **<sup>53</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Elishama, son of Ammihud.

**<sup>54</sup>** On the eighth day Gamaliel, son of Pedahzur, the leader of the sons of Manasseh, brought his offering. **<sup>55</sup>** His offering was one silver plate weighing 130 shekels and one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, **<sup>56</sup>** one golden dish of ten shekels, full of incense, **<sup>57</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering, **<sup>58</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering, **<sup>59</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Gamaliel, son of Pedahzur.

**<sup>60</sup>** On the ninth day, Abidan, son of Gideoni, leader of the sons of Benjamin, brought his offering. **<sup>61</sup>** His offering was one silver plate weighing 130 shekels, and one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, **<sup>62</sup>** one golden dish of ten shekels, full of incense, **<sup>63</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering, **<sup>64</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering, **<sup>65</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Abidan, son of Gideoni.

**<sup>66</sup>** On the tenth day, Ahiezer, son of Ammishaddai, leader of the sons of Dan, brought his offering. **<sup>67</sup>** His offering was one silver plate weighing 130 shekels, and one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, **<sup>68</sup>** one golden dish of ten shekels, full of incense, **<sup>69</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering, **<sup>70</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering, **<sup>71</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Ahiezer, son of Ammishaddai.

**<sup>72</sup>** On the eleventh day, Pagiel, son of Ochran, leader of the sons of Asher, brought his offering. **<sup>73</sup>** His offering was one silver plate weighing 130 shekels, and one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, **<sup>74</sup>** one golden dish of ten shekels, full of incense, **<sup>75</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering, **<sup>76</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering, **<sup>77</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Pagiel, son of Ochran.

**<sup>78</sup>** On the twelfth day, Ahira, son of Enan, leader of the sons of Naphtali, brought his offering. **<sup>79</sup>** His offering was one silver plate weighing 130 shekels, and one silver basin of 70 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering, **<sup>80</sup>** one golden dish of ten shekels, full of incense, **<sup>81</sup>** one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering, **<sup>82</sup>** one male goat for a sin offering, **<sup>83</sup>** and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Ahira, son of Enan.

**<sup>84</sup>** This was the dedication offering for the altar on the day it was anointed, from the leaders of Israel: twelve silver plates, twelve silver basins, twelve golden dishes. **<sup>85</sup>** Each silver plate weighed 130 shekels, and each basin 70 shekels; all the silver of the vessels was 2,400 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary. **<sup>86</sup>** The twelve golden dishes, full of incense, weighed ten shekels each, according to the shekel of the sanctuary; all the gold of the dishes was 120 shekels. **<sup>87</sup>** All the livestock for the burnt offering totaled twelve bulls, twelve rams, twelve male lambs a year old, with their grain offering; and twelve male goats for a sin offering. **<sup>88</sup>** And all the livestock for the sacrifice of peace offerings totaled twenty-four bulls, sixty rams, sixty male goats, sixty male lambs a year old. This was the dedication offering for the altar after it was anointed.

**<sup>89</sup>** When Moses entered the tent of meeting to speak with the LORD, he heard the voice speaking to him from above the mercy seat that was on the ark of the testimony, from between the two cherubim; and he spoke with Him. 

## Chapter 8

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to Aaron and say to him: ‘When you set up the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light in front of the lampstand.’” **<sup>3</sup>** And Aaron did so; he set up the lamps to face forward on the lampstand, as the LORD had commanded Moses. **<sup>4</sup>** Now this was the workmanship of the lampstand: hammered work of gold. From its base to its blossoms it was hammered work; Moses made the lampstand according to the pattern that the LORD had shown him.

**<sup>5</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>6</sup>** “Take the Levites from among the sons of Israel and purify them. **<sup>7</sup>** And this is what you shall do to them, to purify them: sprinkle the water of purification upon them, and let them shave their whole body with a razor and wash their clothes, and so purify themselves. **<sup>8</sup>** Then they shall take a young bull with its grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, and you shall take a second young bull for a sin offering. **<sup>9</sup>** You shall bring the Levites before the Tent of Meeting, and you shall gather the whole congregation of the sons of Israel. **<sup>10</sup>** You shall bring the Levites before the LORD, and the sons of Israel shall lay their hands on the Levites. **<sup>11</sup>** Then Aaron shall present the Levites before the LORD as a wave offering from the sons of Israel, so that they may perform the service of the LORD. **<sup>12</sup>** The Levites shall lay their hands on the heads of the bulls, and you shall offer the one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering to the LORD, to make atonement for the Levites. **<sup>13</sup>** You shall set the Levites before Aaron and before his sons and present them as a wave offering to the LORD.

**<sup>14</sup>** Thus you shall separate the Levites from among the sons of Israel, and the Levites shall be mine. **<sup>15</sup>** After that the Levites shall go in to serve at the Tent of Meeting, once you have purified them and presented them as a wave offering, **<sup>16</sup>** for they are wholly given to me from among the sons of Israel. I have taken them for myself instead of all who open the womb, the firstborn of all the sons of Israel. **<sup>17</sup>** For every firstborn among the sons of Israel is mine, both man and beast. On the day that I struck down all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, I consecrated them to myself. **<sup>18</sup>** But I have taken the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel. **<sup>19</sup>** I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons from among the sons of Israel, to perform the service of the sons of Israel at the Tent of Meeting and to make atonement for the sons of Israel, so that there will be no plague among the sons of Israel when the sons of Israel come near the sanctuary.”

**<sup>20</sup>** Thus Moses and Aaron and all the congregation of the sons of Israel did to the Levites. According to all that the LORD commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so the sons of Israel did to them. **<sup>21</sup>** The Levites purified themselves and washed their clothes, and Aaron presented them as a wave offering before the LORD, and Aaron made atonement for them to purify them. **<sup>22</sup>** After that the Levites went in to perform their service at the Tent of Meeting before Aaron and before his sons. Just as the LORD had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so they did to them.

**<sup>23</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>24</sup>** “This is what applies to the Levites: from twenty-five years old and upward they shall come to perform service in the work at the Tent of Meeting. **<sup>25</sup>** But from the age of fifty years they shall retire from the service and shall not work any longer. **<sup>26</sup>** They may assist their brothers in the Tent of Meeting by keeping guard, but they themselves shall not do the work. Thus you shall deal with the Levites in regard to their duties.” 

## Chapter 9

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Let the sons of Israel keep the Passover at its appointed time. **<sup>3</sup>** On the fourteenth day of this month at twilight, you shall keep it at its appointed time; according to all its statutes and according to all its ordinances you shall keep it.” **<sup>4</sup>** So Moses spoke to the sons of Israel to keep the Passover. **<sup>5</sup>** And they kept the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first month at twilight in the wilderness of Sinai; according to all that the LORD had commanded Moses, so the sons of Israel did. **<sup>6</sup>** But there were certain men who were unclean because of a dead body, and they could not keep the Passover on that day. So they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day, **<sup>7</sup>** and those men said to him, “We are unclean because of a dead body. Why are we kept from presenting the offering of the LORD at its appointed time among the sons of Israel?” **<sup>8</sup>** And Moses said to them, “Wait, and I will hear what the LORD will command concerning you.”

**<sup>9</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>10</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, saying: ‘If any man of you or of your generations becomes unclean because of a dead body, or is on a journey far away, he may still keep the Passover to the LORD. **<sup>11</sup>** In the second month on the fourteenth day at twilight, they shall keep it; they shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. **<sup>12</sup>** They shall leave none of it until morning, nor break a bone of it. They shall keep it according to all the statutes of the Passover. **<sup>13</sup>** But the man who is clean and is not on a journey and yet fails to keep the Passover, that person shall be cut off from his people, because he did not present the offering of the LORD at its appointed time. That man shall bear his sin. **<sup>14</sup>** If a foreigner dwells with you and keeps the Passover to the LORD, according to the statute of the Passover and according to its ordinance, he may do so. You shall have one statute, both for the foreigner and for the native of the land.’”

**<sup>15</sup>** On the day the tabernacle was set up, the cloud covered the tabernacle, the tent of the testimony. And at evening it was over the tabernacle like the appearance of fire until morning. **<sup>16</sup>** So it was always: the cloud covered it by day and the appearance of fire by night.

**<sup>17</sup>** Whenever the cloud was lifted from over the tent, after that the sons of Israel would set out, and in the place where the cloud settled, there the sons of Israel would camp. **<sup>18</sup>** At the command of the LORD the sons of Israel set out, and at the command of the LORD they camped. As long as the cloud dwelled over the tabernacle, they remained encamped. **<sup>19</sup>** Even when the cloud lingered over the tabernacle for many days, the sons of Israel kept the charge of the LORD and did not set out.

**<sup>20</sup>** Sometimes the cloud was over the tabernacle only a few days. At the command of the LORD they would remain encamped, and at the command of the LORD they would set out. **<sup>21</sup>** Sometimes the cloud remained from evening until morning, and when the cloud was lifted in the morning, they would set out; or if it remained for a day and a night, when the cloud was lifted they would set out. **<sup>22</sup>** Whether it was two days or a month or a year that the cloud remained over the tabernacle, staying above it, the sons of Israel remained encamped and did not set out. But when it was lifted, they set out. **<sup>23</sup>** At the command of the LORD they encamped, and at the command of the LORD they set out. They kept the charge of the LORD, at the command of the LORD through Moses. 

## Chapter 10

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Make for yourself two silver trumpets. Of hammered work you shall make them, and they shall be used for summoning the congregation and for setting the camps in motion. **<sup>3</sup>** When both are blown, all the congregation shall gather themselves to you at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>4</sup>** But if only one is blown, then the leaders, the heads of the tribes of Israel, shall assemble before you. **<sup>5</sup>** When you blow an alarm, the camps that are on the east side shall set out. **<sup>6</sup>** And when you blow an alarm the second time, the camps that are on the south side shall set out. An alarm is to be blown whenever they are to set out. **<sup>7</sup>** But when the assembly is to be gathered together, you shall blow, but you shall not sound an alarm. **<sup>8</sup>** The sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow the trumpets. And they shall be for you as a perpetual statute throughout your generations. **<sup>9</sup>** When you go to war in your land against the adversary who attacks you, then you shall sound an alarm with the trumpets, so that you may be remembered before the LORD your God and be saved from your enemies. **<sup>10</sup>** Also on the day of your gladness and on your appointed feasts and on the beginnings of your months, you shall blow the trumpets over your burnt offerings and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings; they shall serve as a reminder for you before your God. I am the LORD your God.”

**<sup>11</sup>** In the second year, in the second month, on the twentieth day of the month, the cloud was lifted from over the tabernacle of the testimony. **<sup>12</sup>** And the sons of Israel set out by stages from the wilderness of Sinai. Then the cloud settled in the wilderness of Paran. **<sup>13</sup>** So they set out for the first time at the command of the LORD by Moses. **<sup>14</sup>** The standard of the camp of the sons of Judah set out first by their divisions, and over their host was Nahshon the son of Amminadab. **<sup>15</sup>** And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Issachar was Nethanel the son of Zuar. **<sup>16</sup>** And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Zebulun was Eliab the son of Helon.

**<sup>17</sup>** Then the tabernacle was taken down, and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari set out, carrying the tabernacle. **<sup>18</sup>** Then the standard of the camp of Reuben set out by their divisions, and over their host was Elizur the son of Shedeur. **<sup>19</sup>** And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Simeon was Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai. **<sup>20</sup>** And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Gad was Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

**<sup>21</sup>** Then the Kohathites set out, carrying the holy things, and the tabernacle was to be set up before their arrival. **<sup>22</sup>** Then the standard of the camp of the sons of Ephraim set out by their divisions, and over their host was Elishama the son of Ammihud. **<sup>23</sup>** And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Manasseh was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. **<sup>24</sup>** And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin was Abidan the son of Gideoni.

**<sup>25</sup>** Then the standard of the camp of the sons of Dan set out, acting as the rear guard for all the camps by their divisions, and over their host was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai. **<sup>26</sup>** And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Asher was Pagiel the son of Ochran. **<sup>27</sup>** And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali was Ahira the son of Enan. **<sup>28</sup>** This was the order of march of the sons of Israel by their divisions as they set out.

**<sup>29</sup>** And Moses said to Hobab the son of Reuel the Midianite, Moses’ father-in-law, “We are setting out for the place of which the LORD said, ‘I will give it to you.’ Come with us, and we will do good to you, for the LORD has promised good concerning Israel.” **<sup>30</sup>** But he said to him, “I will not go. I will go to my own land and to my kindred.” **<sup>31</sup>** Then he said, “Please do not leave us, for you know where we should camp in the wilderness, and you will serve as eyes for us. **<sup>32</sup>** And if you go with us—whatever good the LORD does for us—we will do the same for you.”

**<sup>33</sup>** So they set out from the mount of the LORD three days’ journey, with the ark of the covenant of the LORD going before them for the three days’ journey, to seek out a resting place for them. **<sup>34</sup>** And the cloud of the LORD was over them by day, when they set out from the camp.

**<sup>35</sup>** And whenever the ark set out, Moses said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Arise, O LORD, and let Your enemies be scattered,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and let those who hate You flee before You.”

**<sup>36</sup>** And when it came to rest, he said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Return, O LORD, to the ten thousand thousands of Israel.”<br/>


## Chapter 11

**<sup>1</sup>** Now the people began to complain in the hearing of the LORD about their hardships, and the LORD heard. His anger was kindled, and the fire of the LORD burned among them and consumed some on the outskirts of the camp. **<sup>2</sup>** Then the people cried out to Moses, and Moses prayed to the LORD, and the fire died down. **<sup>3</sup>** So that place was called Taberah, because the fire of the LORD burned among them.

**<sup>4</sup>** The mixed multitude who were among them craved intensely, and the sons of Israel also wept again and said, “Who will give us meat to eat? **<sup>5</sup>** We remember the fish that we ate freely in Egypt, the cucumbers, the melons, the leeks, the onions, and the garlic. **<sup>6</sup>** But now our soul is dried up; there is nothing at all except this manna to look at.”

**<sup>7</sup>** Now the manna was like coriander seed, and its appearance like that of bdellium. **<sup>8</sup>** The people went about and gathered it and ground it between millstones or beat it in a mortar and boiled it in pots and made it into cakes, and its taste was like the taste of cakes baked with oil.

**<sup>9</sup>** When the dew fell on the camp at night, the manna would fall upon it. **<sup>10</sup>** Then Moses heard the people moaning throughout their clans, each man at the entrance of his tent. And the anger of the LORD was burned, and Moses was displeased. **<sup>11</sup>** Moses said to the LORD, “Why have You afflicted Your servant? And why have I not found favor in Your sight, that You lay the burden of all these people on me? **<sup>12</sup>** Did I conceive all this people? Did I give birth to them, that You should say to me, ‘Carry them in your bosom as a nurse carries a nursing child,’ to the land which You swore to their fathers?

**<sup>13</sup>** Where am I to get meat to give to all this people? For they groan before me, saying, ‘Give us meat to eat!’ **<sup>14</sup>** I am not able to support all these people alone, because it is too difficult for me. **<sup>15</sup>** If You treat me this way, please kill me now—if I have found favor in Your sight—so that I do not see my wretchedness.”

**<sup>16</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Gather for Me seventy men from the elders of Israel, whom you know to be leaders of the people and officers over them. Bring them to the tent of meeting, and let them stand there with you. **<sup>17</sup>** Then I will come down and speak with you there, and I will take some of the Spirit who is upon you and put Him upon them. Then they shall support the people with you, so that you do not struggle alone. **<sup>18</sup>** Say to the people, ‘Consecrate yourselves for tomorrow, and you will eat meat; for the LORD has heard your complaints, when you were saying, “Who will give us meat to eat? For it was better for us in Egypt.” Therefore the LORD will give you meat to eat.

**<sup>19</sup>** But you will eat not it for only one day, nor two days, nor five days, nor ten days, nor twenty days, **<sup>20</sup>** but for a whole month, until it comes out of your nostrils and becomes loathsome to you, because you have rejected the LORD who is among you and have wept before Him, saying, “Why did we come out of Egypt?”’” **<sup>21</sup>** But Moses said, “There are six hundred thousand people on foot here with me, yet You have said, ‘I will give them meat, that they may eat for a whole month.’ **<sup>22</sup>** Shall flocks and herds be slaughtered to provide enough for them? Or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together to provide enough for them?” **<sup>23</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, “Is the LORD’s hand shortened? Now you shall see if My word comes to pass for you.”

**<sup>24</sup>** So Moses went out and told the people the words of the LORD. And he gathered seventy men from the elders of the people and stationed them around the tent. **<sup>25</sup>** Then the LORD came down in the cloud and spoke to him. And He took of the Spirit who was upon him and put Him upon the seventy elders. And when the Spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, but they did not continue doing it.

**<sup>26</sup>** But two men had remained in the camp; the name of one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad. And the Spirit rested on them (they were among those written down but had not gone out to the tent), and they prophesied in the camp. **<sup>27</sup>** Then a young man ran and told Moses, saying, “Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp.” **<sup>28</sup>** Joshua son of Nun, the assistant of Moses from his youth, answered and said, “My lord Moses, restrain them!” **<sup>29</sup>** But Moses said to him, “Are you jealous for my sake? I would be glad if all the LORD’s people were prophets, that the LORD would put His Spirit upon them!” **<sup>30</sup>** Then Moses returned to the camp, both he and the elders of Israel.

**<sup>31</sup>** Then a wind from the LORD went out and brought quail from the sea and let them fall beside the camp, about a day’s journey on one side and a day’s journey on the other side, all around the camp, about two cubits deep on the surface of the ground. **<sup>32</sup>** And the people rose all that day and all night and all the next day and gathered the quail (the one who gathered least, gathered ten homers), and they spread them out for themselves all around the camp. **<sup>33</sup>** While the meat was still between their teeth, before they had chewed it, the anger of the LORD was kindled against the people, and the LORD struck the people with a very great plague. **<sup>34</sup>** So that place was called Kibroth-hattaavah, because there they buried the men who had craved. **<sup>35</sup>** From Kibroth-hattaavah the people journeyed to Hazeroth, and they stayed at Hazeroth. 

## Chapter 12

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the Cushite woman whom he had taken, for he had a Cushite wife. **<sup>2</sup>** They said, “Has the LORD really spoken only through Moses? Hasn’t He also spoken through us?” And the LORD heard it.

**<sup>3</sup>** Now the man Moses was very humble, more than any man who was on the face of the earth.

**<sup>4</sup>** And suddenly the LORD said to Moses and to Aaron and to Miriam, “Come out, the three of you, to the tent of meeting.” So the three of them went out. **<sup>5</sup>** Then the LORD came down in a pillar of cloud and stood at the entrance of the tent and called Aaron and Miriam, and they both came forward. **<sup>6</sup>** And He said, “Hear My words: If there is a prophet among you, I, the LORD, make Myself known to him in a vision; I speak to him in a dream. **<sup>7</sup>** Not so with My servant Moses; he is faithful in all My house. **<sup>8</sup>** With him I speak face to face, clearly, and not in riddles, and he sees the form of the LORD. Why, then, were you not afraid to speak against My servant, Moses?”

**<sup>9</sup>** And the anger of the LORD was kindled against them, and He departed. **<sup>10</sup>** When the cloud lifted from over the tent, they saw that  Miriam was leprous, like snow. And Aaron turned toward Miriam, and she was leprous. **<sup>11</sup>** Then Aaron said to Moses, “Oh, my lord, please do not hold this sin against us in which we have acted foolishly and have sinned. **<sup>12</sup>** Let her not be as one dead, whose flesh is half eaten away when he comes out of his mother’s womb.”

**<sup>13</sup>** So Moses cried out to the LORD, saying, “O God, please heal her, please!” **<sup>14</sup>** But the LORD said to Moses, “If her father had but spit in her face, would she not bear her shame for seven days? Let her be shut outside the camp for seven days, and afterward she may be brought in again.” **<sup>15</sup>** So Miriam was shut outside the camp for seven days, and the people did not journey until Miriam was brought in again.

**<sup>16</sup>** After that the people set out from Hazeroth and camped in the wilderness of Paran. 

## Chapter 13

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Send men to spy out the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the sons of Israel. You shall send one man from each tribe of his fathers, each one a chief among them.” **<sup>3</sup>** So Moses sent them from the wilderness of Paran at the command of the LORD, all of them men who were heads of the sons of Israel.

**<sup>4</sup>** These were their names: from the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur; **<sup>5</sup>** from the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori; **<sup>6</sup>** from the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh; **<sup>7</sup>** from the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph; **<sup>8</sup>** from the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Nun; **<sup>9</sup>** from the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu; **<sup>10</sup>** from the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi; **<sup>11</sup>** from the tribe of Joseph, from the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi; **<sup>12</sup>** from the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli; **<sup>13</sup>** from the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael; **<sup>14</sup>** from the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi; **<sup>15</sup>** from the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi. **<sup>16</sup>** These are the names of the men whom Moses sent to spy out the land. But Moses called Hoshea the son of Nun, Joshua.

**<sup>17</sup>** Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan and said to them, “Go through the Negev and into the hill country, **<sup>18</sup>** and see what the land is like, and whether the people who dwell in it are strong or weak, few or many, **<sup>19</sup>** and whether the land in which they dwell is good or bad, and whether the cities they live in are like camps or have fortifications, **<sup>20</sup>** and whether the land is rich or poor, and whether there are trees in it or not. Be courageous, and take some of the fruit of the land.” Now the time was the season of the first ripe grapes.

**<sup>21</sup>** So they went up and spied out the land from the wilderness of Zin as far as Rehob, at Lebo-hamath. **<sup>22</sup>** They went up into the Negev and came to Hebron. Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the descendants of Anak, were there. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)

**<sup>23</sup>** Then they came to the Valley of Eshcol and cut down from there a branch with a single cluster of grapes, and they carried it on a pole between two men, with some pomegranates and figs. **<sup>24</sup>** That place was called the Valley of Eshcol because of the cluster that the sons of Israel cut down from there.

**<sup>25</sup>** At the end of forty days they returned from spying out the land. **<sup>26</sup>** They came to Moses and Aaron and to all the congregation of the sons of Israel in the wilderness of Paran at Kadesh, and brought back word to them and to all the congregation, and showed them the fruit of the land. **<sup>27</sup>** They told him and said, “We came into the land where you sent us, and it certainly does flow with milk and honey, and this is its fruit. **<sup>28</sup>** Nevertheless, the people who dwell in the land are strong, and the cities are fortified and very large. Moreover, we saw the descendants of Anak there. **<sup>29</sup>** Amalek is living in the land of the Negev, and the Hittites, the Jebusites, and the Amorites dwell in the hill country. The Canaanites dwell by the sea and along the Jordan.”

**<sup>30</sup>** Then Caleb quieted the people before Moses and said, “Let us go up at once and take possession of it, for we are certainly able to overcome it.” **<sup>31</sup>** But the men who had gone up with him said, “We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than us.” **<sup>32</sup>** So they gave a bad report of the land that they had spied out to the sons of Israel, saying, “The land through which we have gone to spy it out is a land that devours its inhabitants, and all the people whom we saw in it are men of great stature. **<sup>33</sup>** There we saw the Nephilim (the sons of Anak are of the Nephilim), and we seemed like grasshoppers in our own sight, and so we seemed in their sight. 

## Chapter 14

**<sup>1</sup>** Then all the congregation lifted up their voices and cried out, and the people wept that night. **<sup>2</sup>** All the sons of Israel grumbled against Moses and Aaron, and the whole congregation said to them, “Oh, that we would have died in the land of Egypt, or that we would have died in this wilderness! **<sup>3</sup>** Why is the LORD bringing us into this land, to fall by the sword? Our wives and our little ones will become plunder. Wouldn't it be better for us to return to Egypt?” **<sup>4</sup>** So they said to one another, “Let’s appoint a leader and return to Egypt.”

**<sup>5</sup>** Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before the entire assembly of the congregation of the sons of Israel. **<sup>6</sup>** And Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, who were among those who had spied out the land, tore their clothes, **<sup>7</sup>** and they said to the entire congregation of the sons of Israel, “The land which we passed through to spy out is an exceedingly good land. **<sup>8</sup>** If the LORD delights in us, then He will bring us into this land and give it to us—a land which flows with milk and honey. **<sup>9</sup>** Only do not rebel against the LORD, and do not fear the people of the land, for they are bread for us. Their protection has been removed from them, and the LORD is with us. Do not fear them.” **<sup>10</sup>** But all the congregation said, stone them. Then the glory of the LORD appeared in the tent of meeting, to all the sons of Israel.

**<sup>11</sup>** The LORD said to Moses, “How long will this people spurn Me? And how long will they not believe in Me, despite all the signs that I have performed among them? **<sup>12</sup>** I will strike them with a plague and destroy them, and I will make you into a nation greater and mightier than they.”

**<sup>13</sup>** But Moses said to the LORD, “Then the Egyptians will hear of it, for You brought up this people by Your power from among them, **<sup>14</sup>** and they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land. They have heard that You, O LORD, are in the midst of this people—for You, O LORD, are seen face to face, and Your cloud stands over them, and You go before them in a pillar of cloud by day and in a pillar of fire by night. **<sup>15</sup>** Now if You put this people to death all at once, then the nations who have heard of Your fame will say, **<sup>16</sup>** ‘The LORD was not able to bring this people into the land which He had promised them by oath, so He has slaughtered them in the wilderness.’ **<sup>17</sup>** But now, please let the power of the Lord be great, just as You have spoken, saying, **<sup>18</sup>** ‘The LORD is slow to anger and abundant in loyal love, forgiving iniquity and transgression, but He will by no means leave the guilty unpunished, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children to the third and the fourth generation.’ **<sup>19</sup>** Please pardon the guilt of this people according to the greatness of Your loyal love, just as You also have forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now.”

**<sup>20</sup>** So the LORD said, “I have pardoned them according to your word. **<sup>21</sup>** But as I live, all the earth will be filled with the glory of the LORD. **<sup>22</sup>** Therefore, all the men who have seen My glory and My miracles which I performed in Egypt and in the wilderness, yet have tested Me these ten times and have not listened to My voice, **<sup>23</sup>** they shall by no means see the land which I swore to their fathers, nor shall any of those who spurned Me see it. **<sup>24</sup>** But My servant Caleb, because he had a different spirit and has followed Me fully, I will bring him into the land into which he went, and his descendants shall take possession of it. **<sup>25</sup>** Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites are living in the valleys. Tomorrow, turn around and set out for the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea.”

**<sup>26</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, **<sup>27</sup>** “How long shall I bear with this evil congregation who are grumbling against Me? I have heard the complaints of the sons of Israel, which they are raising against Me. **<sup>28</sup>** Say to them, ‘As I live, declares the LORD, just as you have spoken in My hearing, so I will do to you: **<sup>29</sup>** your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness, all your adult men, twenty years old and older, who have grumbled against Me. **<sup>30</sup>** You shall by no means come into the land in which I swore to settle you, except Caleb the son of Jephunneh and Joshua the son of Nun. **<sup>31</sup>** But your little ones, whom you said would become plunder—I will bring them in, and they shall know the land which you have rejected. **<sup>32</sup>** But as for you, your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness. **<sup>33</sup>** Your sons shall be shepherds in the wilderness forty years, and they shall bear your unfaithfulness, until your corpses are decaying in the wilderness. **<sup>34</sup>** According to the number of the days you spied out the land, forty days, for each day you shall bear your iniquity for a year, namely forty years, and you shall know what it means to oppose me. **<sup>35</sup>** I, the LORD, have spoken; I will certainly do this to the entire evil congregation gathered together against Me. They shall come to an end, and they shall die in this wilderness.’”

**<sup>36</sup>** As for the men whom Moses sent to spy out the land and who returned and made all the congregation grumble against him by bringing a bad report of the land, **<sup>37</sup>** those men who brought the bad report of the land died by a plague before the LORD. **<sup>38</sup>** But Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh remained alive of those men who went to spy out the land.

**<sup>39</sup>** When Moses spoke these words to all the sons of Israel, the people mourned greatly. **<sup>40</sup>** In the morning they rose early and went up to the ridge of the hill country, saying, “We are here at the place which the LORD has promised. And though we have indeed sinned, we will still enter here.” **<sup>41</sup>** But Moses said, “Why are you transgressing the commandment of the LORD? It will not succeed. **<sup>42</sup>** Do not go up, or you will be struck down before your enemies, for the LORD is not among you. **<sup>43</sup>** For the Amalekites and the Canaanites will be there before you, and you will fall by the sword, because you have turned away from the LORD, and the LORD will not be with you.” **<sup>44</sup>** Then they went up heedlessly to the ridge of the hill country. But neither the ark of the covenant of the LORD nor Moses departed from the camp. **<sup>45</sup>** Then the Amalekites and the Canaanites who lived in that hill country came down, struck them, and beat them down as far as Hormah. 

## Chapter 15

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘When you come into the land where you are to live, which I am giving to you, **<sup>3</sup>** and you offer to the LORD a food offering from the herd or the flock, either as a burnt offering or a sacrifice, to fulfill a vow or as a freewill offering or in your appointed times, to make a pleasing aroma to the LORD, **<sup>4</sup>** then the one who brings his offering shall present to the LORD a grain offering of a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with a fourth of a hin of oil, **<sup>5</sup>** and wine for the drink offering, a fourth of a hin you shall prepare with the burnt offering or for the sacrifice, for each lamb. **<sup>6</sup>** Or for a ram you shall prepare as a grain offering two tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with a third of a hin of oil, **<sup>7</sup>** and for the drink offering you shall offer a third of a hin of wine as a pleasing aroma to the LORD. **<sup>8</sup>** When you prepare a bull as a burnt offering or a sacrifice, to fulfill a vow or for peace offerings to the LORD, **<sup>9</sup>** then he shall offer with the bull a grain offering of three tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with half a hin of oil, **<sup>10</sup>** and you shall offer as the drink offering half a hin of wine as a food offering, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.

**<sup>11</sup>** Thus it shall be done for each ox, or for each ram, or for each of the male lambs or goats. **<sup>12</sup>** According to the number that you prepare, so you shall do for each one according to their number. **<sup>13</sup>** Every native among you shall do these things in this way, in presenting a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD.

**<sup>14</sup>** And if a foreigner lives among you, or whoever is among you throughout your generations, and he desires to offer a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD, he shall do as you do. **<sup>15</sup>** As for the assembly, there shall be one statute for you and for the foreigner who lives among you, a perpetual statute throughout your generations. As you are, so shall the foreigner be before the LORD. **<sup>16</sup>** There shall be one law and one ordinance for you and for the stranger who lives among you.’”

**<sup>17</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>18</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘When you come into the land where I bring you, **<sup>19</sup>** then, when you eat of the bread of the land, you shall offer up a contribution to the LORD. **<sup>20</sup>** Of the first of your dough you shall offer up a cake as a contribution; as the contribution from the threshing floor, so shall you offer it. **<sup>21</sup>** From the first of your dough you shall give to the LORD a contribution throughout your generations.’”

**<sup>22</sup>** “But when you unintentionally fail and do not observe all these commandments which the LORD has spoken to Moses, **<sup>23</sup>** all that the LORD has commanded you by the hand of Moses, from the day that the LORD gave the commandment and onward throughout your generations, **<sup>24</sup>** then if it was done unintentionally, without the knowledge of the congregation, then all the congregation shall offer one bull from the herd for a burnt offering, as a pleasing aroma to the LORD, with its grain offering and its drink offering, according to the ordinance, and one male goat as a sin offering. **<sup>25</sup>** Then the priest shall make atonement for all the congregation of the sons of Israel, and they shall be forgiven, for it was unintentional, and they have brought their offering, a food offering to the LORD, and their sin offering before the LORD, for their error. **<sup>26</sup>** So all the congregation of the sons of Israel shall be forgiven, as well as the foreigner who lives among them, since it happened to all the people unintentionally.

**<sup>27</sup>** If a person sins unintentionally, then he shall bring a female goat a year old for a sin offering. **<sup>28</sup>** And the priest shall make atonement before the LORD for the person who goes astray when he sins unintentionally, to make atonement for him, and he shall be forgiven. **<sup>29</sup>** You shall have one law for him who does anything unintentionally, for him who is native among the sons of Israel and for the stranger who lives among them. **<sup>30</sup>** But the person who does anything with a high hand, whether he is native or a stranger, that one blasphemes the LORD, and that person shall be cut off from among his people. **<sup>31</sup>** Because he has despised the word of the LORD and has broken His commandment, that person shall be completely cut off; his guilt shall be upon him.”

**<sup>32</sup>** Now while the sons of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man gathering wood on the Sabbath day. **<sup>33</sup>** Those who found him gathering wood brought him to Moses and Aaron and to all the congregation. **<sup>34</sup>** They put him in custody, because it had not been made clear what should be done to him. **<sup>35</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “The man shall surely be put to death; all the congregation shall stone him outside the camp.” **<sup>36</sup>** So all the congregation brought him outside the camp and stoned him, and he died, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>37</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>38</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, and tell them to make for themselves tassels on the corners of their garments throughout their generations, and to put a cord of blue on the tassel of each corner. **<sup>39</sup>** And it shall be a tassel for you to look at and remember all the commandments of the LORD, to do them, and not to follow after your own heart and your own eyes, after which you play the harlot, **<sup>40</sup>** so that you may remember to do all My commandments and be holy to your God. **<sup>41</sup>** I am the LORD your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God; I am the LORD your God.” 

## Chapter 16

**<sup>1</sup>** Now Korah, son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, along with Dathan and Abiram, sons of Eliab, and On son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took men. **<sup>2</sup>** And they rebelled against Moses with some of the sons of Israel—two hundred fifty men from the congregation, leaders of the assembly, chosen men of the meeting, men of renown. **<sup>3</sup>** And they gathered together against Moses and against Aaron and said to them, “You take too much upon yourselves, for everyone in the congregation—all of them—are holy, and the LORD is among them. Why then do you exalt yourselves above the assembly of the LORD?”

**<sup>4</sup>** When Moses heard this, he fell on his face. **<sup>5</sup>** Then he spoke to Korah and to all his company, saying, “In the morning the LORD will make known who is His and who is holy, and will cause him to come near to Him. The one whom He chooses, He will cause to come near to Him. **<sup>6</sup>** Do this: take censers, Korah and all his company, **<sup>7</sup>** and put fire in them and place incense on them before the LORD tomorrow. Then it shall be that the man whom the LORD chooses, he shall be the holy one. You sons of Levi take too much upon yourselves!”

**<sup>8</sup>** Moses said to Korah, “Hear now, you sons of Levi: **<sup>9</sup>** Is it too little for you that the God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel to bring you near to Himself to perform the service of the tabernacle of the LORD, and to stand before the congregation to minister to them? **<sup>10</sup>** And He has brought you near, and all your brothers, the sons of Levi, with you. And are you seeking the priesthood also? **<sup>11</sup>** Therefore you and all your company have gathered together against the LORD. And what is Aaron that you grumble against him?”

**<sup>12</sup>** Then Moses sent to summon Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, but they said, “We will not come up. **<sup>13</sup>** Is it a small thing that you have brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey to kill us in the wilderness, but you must also make yourself a prince over us? **<sup>14</sup>** Moreover, you have not brought us into a land flowing with milk and honey, nor given us inheritance of field and vineyard. Will you gouge out the eyes of these men? We will not come up.”

**<sup>15</sup>** Then Moses was very angry and said to the LORD, “Do not regard their offering. I have not taken one donkey from them, nor have I harmed any of them.” **<sup>16</sup>** Moses said to Korah, “You and all your company be before the LORD tomorrow, you and they and Aaron. **<sup>17</sup>** And each man take his censer and put incense on it, and each man bring before the LORD his censer—two hundred fifty censers—you also and Aaron, each his censer.” **<sup>18</sup>** So each man took his censer and put fire in them and placed incense on them, and they stood at the entrance of the tent of meeting with Moses and Aaron. **<sup>19</sup>** Then Korah assembled all the congregation against them at the entrance of the tent of meeting. And the glory of the LORD appeared to all the congregation.

**<sup>20</sup>** And the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, **<sup>21</sup>** “Separate yourselves from among this congregation, so that I may consume them in a moment.” **<sup>22</sup>** But they fell on their faces and said, “O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and will You be angry with all the congregation?”

**<sup>23</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>24</sup>** “Speak to the congregation, saying, ‘Get away from the dwelling of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.’” **<sup>25</sup>** Then Moses rose and went to Dathan and Abiram, and the elders of Israel followed him. **<sup>26</sup>** And he spoke to the congregation, saying, “Turn away now from the tents of these wicked men and do not touch anything that belongs to them, or you will be swept away in all their sin.”

**<sup>27</sup>** So they got back from around the dwelling of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. And Dathan and Abiram came out and stood at the entrance of their tents, with their wives, their sons, and their little ones. **<sup>28</sup>** Moses said, “By this you shall know that the LORD has sent me to do all these works, and that it was not from my own heart: **<sup>29</sup>** If these men die the common death of all men, or if they are visited by the fate of all men, then the LORD has not sent me. **<sup>30</sup>** But if the LORD creates something new, and the ground opens its mouth and swallows them up with all that belongs to them, and they go down alive into the grave, then you shall know that these men have despised the LORD.”

**<sup>31</sup>** And it came to pass, as he finished speaking all these words, that the ground that was under them split apart. **<sup>32</sup>** And the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up, along with their households and all the men who belonged to Korah, with all their possessions. **<sup>33</sup>** So they and all that belonged to them went down alive into the grave, and the earth closed over them, and they perished from the midst of the assembly. **<sup>34</sup>** And all Israel who were around them fled at their outcry, for they said, “Lest the earth swallow us up also!” **<sup>35</sup>** And fire came out from the LORD and consumed the two hundred fifty men who were offering the incense.

**<sup>36</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>37</sup>** “Say to Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, to take up the censers out of the burning and scatter the fire far away, for they have become holy.

**<sup>38</sup>** The censers of these sinners against their own lives—let them be made into hammered plates as a covering for the altar, because they were presented before the LORD and became holy. They shall be a sign to the sons of Israel.” **<sup>39</sup>** So Eleazar the priest took the bronze censers, which those who were burned had brought, and they were hammered out as a covering for the altar, **<sup>40</sup>** to be a memorial to the sons of Israel, so that no outsider, who is not of the seed of Aaron, should come near to offer incense before the LORD, so that he does not become like Korah and his company—just as the LORD had spoken to him through Moses.

**<sup>41</sup>** But on the next day, all the congregation of the sons of Israel grumbled against Moses and against Aaron, saying, “You have killed the people of the LORD.” **<sup>42</sup>** And then, when the congregation had assembled against Moses and Aaron, they turned toward the tent of meeting, and saw that the cloud which covered it and the glory of the LORD had appeared. **<sup>43</sup>** Then Moses and Aaron came to the front of the tent of meeting, **<sup>44</sup>** and the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>45</sup>** “Get away from among this congregation, so that I may consume them in a moment.” But they fell on their faces. **<sup>46</sup>** And Moses said to Aaron, “Take your censer and put fire from the altar in it and lay incense on it, and carry it quickly to the congregation and make atonement for them. For wrath has gone out from the LORD; the plague has begun.” **<sup>47</sup>** So Aaron took it, just as Moses had spoken, and ran into the midst of the assembly. And behold, the plague had begun among the people. So he put on the incense and made atonement for the people. **<sup>48</sup>** And he stood between the dead and the living, and the plague was stopped. **<sup>49</sup>** Now those who died by the plague were fourteen thousand seven hundred, besides those who died because of the matter of Korah. **<sup>50</sup>** And Aaron returned to Moses at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and the plague had been stopped. 

## Chapter 17

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, and take from them one staff for each father's house, from all their leaders according to their fathers’ houses—twelve staffs. You shall write each man's name on his staff, **<sup>3</sup>** and you shall write Aaron’s name on the staff of Levi, for there is to be one staff for the head of each of their fathers’ houses. **<sup>4</sup>** You shall place them in the tent of meeting before the testimony, where I meet with you. **<sup>5</sup>** And it shall be that the staff of the man whom I choose will sprout. Thus I will put an end to the grumblings of the sons of Israel, which they are raising against you.” **<sup>6</sup>** So Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, and all their leaders gave him staffs, one for each leader, according to their fathers’ houses—twelve staffs—and the staff of Aaron was among their staffs. **<sup>7</sup>** Then Moses placed the staffs before the LORD in the tent of the testimony.

**<sup>8</sup>** The next day Moses went into the tent of the testimony, and saw that the staff of Aaron for the house of Levi had sprouted, and brought forth buds, and produced blossoms, and bore ripe almonds. **<sup>9</sup>** Then Moses brought out all the staffs from before the LORD to all the sons of Israel, and they looked, and each man took his staff. **<sup>10</sup>** And the LORD said to Moses, “Put back the staff of Aaron before the testimony, to be kept as a sign for the rebellious, so that you may put an end to their grumblings against Me, and they do not die.” **<sup>11</sup>** So Moses did; just as the LORD commanded him, so he did.

**<sup>12</sup>** Then the sons of Israel spoke to Moses, saying, “Behold, we perish, we are undone, we are all undone! **<sup>13</sup>** Everyone who comes near, who comes near to the tabernacle of the LORD, will die. Shall we all perish?” 

## Chapter 18

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD said to Aaron, “You and your sons and your father's house with you shall bear the guilt connected with the sanctuary, and you and your sons with you shall bear the guilt connected with your priesthood. **<sup>2</sup>** But bring also your brothers, the tribe of Levi, the tribe of your father, with you, that they may be joined to you and minister to you while you and your sons are before the tent of the testimony. **<sup>3</sup>** They shall keep your guard and the duty of the whole tent, only they shall not come near the furnishings of the sanctuary and the altar, so that they do not die, neither they nor you. **<sup>4</sup>** They shall be joined to you and keep the duty of the tent of meeting, for all the service of the tent, and no outsider may come near you. **<sup>5</sup>** You shall keep the duty of the sanctuary and the duty of the altar, so that there will no longer be wrath on the sons of Israel. **<sup>6</sup>** I Myself have taken your brothers the Levites from among the sons of Israel; they are a gift to you, given to the LORD, to do the service of the tent of meeting. **<sup>7</sup>** But you and your sons with you shall keep your priesthood for everything concerning the altar and within the veil, and you shall perform the services. I give your priesthood as a gift of service, but the outsider who comes near shall be put to death.

**<sup>8</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Aaron, “Now, I Myself have given you responsibility for My offerings, even all the holy gifts of the sons of Israel; I have given them to you as a portion and to your sons as a perpetual statute. **<sup>9</sup>** This shall be yours from the most holy gifts, reserved from the fire: every offering of theirs, every grain offering of theirs, and every sin offering of theirs, and every guilt offering of theirs, which they shall render to Me, shall be most holy for you and for your sons. **<sup>10</sup>** As the most holy gifts you shall eat it; every male shall eat it. It shall be holy to you. **<sup>11</sup>** This also is yours: the contribution of their gift, even all the wave offerings of the sons of Israel. I have given them to you and to your sons and daughters with you as a perpetual statute. Everyone who is clean in your house may eat it. **<sup>12</sup>** All the best of the oil and all the best of the new wine and the grain, the firstfruits which they give to the LORD, I have given them to you. **<sup>13</sup>** The first ripe fruits of all that is in their land, which they bring to the LORD, shall be yours; everyone who is clean in your house may eat it. **<sup>14</sup>** Every devoted thing in Israel shall be yours. **<sup>15</sup>** Every firstborn of the womb of all flesh, which they bring to the LORD, whether man or beast, shall be yours; nevertheless, the firstborn of man you shall surely redeem, and the firstborn of unclean beasts you shall redeem. **<sup>16</sup>** And their redemption price, from a month old you shall redeem, by your valuation, five shekels of silver, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs. **<sup>17</sup>** But the firstborn of an ox or the firstborn of a sheep or the firstborn of a goat, you shall not redeem; they are holy. You shall sprinkle their blood on the altar and shall burn their fat as an offering by fire for a soothing aroma to the LORD. **<sup>18</sup>** Their meat shall be yours; it shall be yours like the breast of the wave offering and like the right thigh. **<sup>19</sup>** All the contributions of the holy gifts, which the sons of Israel offer to the LORD, I have given to you and to your sons and daughters with you as a perpetual statute. It is a covenant of salt forever before the LORD for you and for your descendants with you.” **<sup>20</sup>** Then the LORD said to Aaron, “You shall have no inheritance in their land, nor shall you have any portion among them. I am your portion and your inheritance among the sons of Israel.

**<sup>21</sup>** And to the sons of Levi, I have given all the tithe in Israel as an inheritance in return for their service, which they perform, the service of the tent of meeting. **<sup>22</sup>** And the sons of Israel shall not come near the tent of meeting again, or they will bear sin and die. **<sup>23</sup>** But the Levites shall perform the service of the tent of meeting, and they shall bear their guilt. It shall be a perpetual statute throughout your generations, and among the sons of Israel they shall have no inheritance. **<sup>24</sup>** For the tithe of the sons of Israel, which they offer as a contribution to the LORD, I have given to the Levites as an inheritance; therefore I have said to them, ‘They shall have no inheritance among the sons of Israel.’”

**<sup>25</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>26</sup>** “Moreover, you shall speak to the Levites and say to them, ‘When you take from the sons of Israel the tithe which I have given you from them as your inheritance, then you shall offer from it a contribution to the LORD, a tithe of the tithe. **<sup>27</sup>** Your contribution shall be reckoned to you as the grain from the threshing floor or the fullness from the winepress. **<sup>28</sup>** So you shall also offer a contribution to the LORD from all your tithes, which you receive from the sons of Israel; and from it you shall give the LORD’s contribution to Aaron the priest. **<sup>29</sup>** From all your gifts you shall offer every contribution due to the LORD, from all the best of them, the sacred part from them.’ **<sup>30</sup>** You shall say to them, ‘When you offer the best part from it, then it shall be reckoned to the Levites as the produce of the threshing floor and as the produce of the winepress. **<sup>31</sup>** And you may eat it in every place, you and your households, for it is your reward in return for your service in the tent of meeting. **<sup>32</sup>** And you will bear no sin by reason of it when you have offered the best of it. And you shall not profane the holy gifts of the sons of Israel, or you will die.’” 

## Chapter 19

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “This is the statute of the law which the LORD has commanded: Speak to the sons of Israel, that they bring to you a red heifer without defect, in which there is no blemish, and on which a yoke has never been placed. **<sup>3</sup>** You shall give it to Eleazar the priest, and it shall be brought outside the camp, and one shall slaughter it in his presence. **<sup>4</sup>** Then Eleazar the priest shall take some of its blood with his finger and sprinkle some of its blood toward the front of the tent of meeting seven times. **<sup>5</sup>** And the heifer shall be burned in his sight; its hide and its flesh and its blood, with its refuse, shall be burned. **<sup>6</sup>** And the priest shall take cedarwood and hyssop and scarlet, and cast them into the midst of the burning heifer. **<sup>7</sup>** Then the priest shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water, and afterward he may come into the camp; but the priest shall be unclean until evening. **<sup>8</sup>** The one who burns it shall wash his clothes in water and bathe his body in water and shall be unclean until evening. **<sup>9</sup>** Then a man who is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer and deposit them outside the camp in a clean place, and they shall be kept for the congregation of the sons of Israel for water for impurity; it is a purification offering. **<sup>10</sup>** And the one who gathers the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes and be unclean until evening, and it shall be a perpetual statute for the sons of Israel and for the stranger who lives among them.

**<sup>11</sup>** The one who touches the corpse of any man shall be unclean for seven days. **<sup>12</sup>** Then he shall purify himself from it on the third day then on the seventh day he shall be clean; but if he does not purify himself on the third day and on the seventh day, he shall not be clean. **<sup>13</sup>** Anyone who touches a corpse, the body of a man who has died, and does not purify himself defiles the tabernacle of the LORD, and that person shall be cut off from Israel. Because the water for impurity was not sprinkled on him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness is still on him.

**<sup>14</sup>** This is the law when a man dies in a tent: everyone who comes into the tent and everyone who is in the tent shall be unclean for seven days. **<sup>15</sup>** And every open vessel, which has no cover fastened on it, is unclean.

**<sup>16</sup>** Also, anyone who in the open field touches one who has been slain with a sword, or who has died naturally, or a human bone, or a grave, shall be unclean for seven days. **<sup>17</sup>** Then for the unclean they shall take some of the ashes of the burned purification offering and pour running water over them into a vessel. **<sup>18</sup>** And a clean man shall take hyssop and dip it in the water and sprinkle it on the tent and on all the furnishings and on the persons who were there and on the one who touched the bone or the slain or the one who died naturally or the grave. **<sup>19</sup>** And the clean person shall sprinkle on the unclean on the third day and on the seventh day; and on the seventh day he shall purify him. Then he shall wash his clothes and bathe in water and shall be clean in the evening.

**<sup>20</sup>** But the man who is unclean and does not purify himself, that person shall be cut off from the midst of the assembly, for he has defiled the sanctuary of the LORD. The water for impurity has not been sprinkled on him; he is unclean. **<sup>21</sup>** So it shall be a perpetual statute for them. And the one who sprinkles the water for impurity shall wash his clothes, and the one who touches the water for impurity shall be unclean until evening. **<sup>22</sup>** And whatever the unclean person touches shall be unclean, and the person who touches it shall be unclean until evening. 

## Chapter 20

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the sons of Israel, the whole congregation, came into the wilderness of Zin in the first month, and the people stayed at Kadesh. Miriam died there and was buried there.

**<sup>2</sup>** Now there was no water for the congregation, and they assembled against Moses and against Aaron. **<sup>3</sup>** The people quarreled with Moses and said, “If only we had perished when our brothers perished before the LORD! **<sup>4</sup>** Why then have you brought the assembly of the LORD into this wilderness, for us and our cattle to die here? **<sup>5</sup>** And why have you made us come up from Egypt, to bring us to this evil place? It is not a place of grain or figs or vines or pomegranates, and there is no water to drink.” **<sup>6</sup>** Then Moses and Aaron came from the presence of the assembly to the entrance of the tent of meeting and fell on their faces. And the glory of the LORD appeared to them.

**<sup>7</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>8</sup>** “Take the staff, and assemble the congregation, you and Aaron your brother, and speak to the rock before their eyes, and it will yield its water. So you shall bring out water for them from the rock and give drink to the congregation and their cattle.”

**<sup>9</sup>** So Moses took the staff from before the LORD, just as He had commanded him. **<sup>10</sup>** Then Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly before the rock, and he said to them, “Listen now, you rebels; shall we bring forth water for you out of this rock?” **<sup>11</sup>** Then Moses raised his hand and struck the rock twice with his staff, and water came out abundantly, and the congregation and their cattle drank. **<sup>12</sup>** But the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, “Because you did not trust in Me, to treat Me as holy in the eyes of the sons of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this assembly into the land which I have given them.” **<sup>13</sup>** These were the waters of Meribah, because the sons of Israel contended with the LORD, and He proved Himself holy among them. **<sup>14</sup>** Then Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the king of Edom: “Thus says your brother Israel: You know all the hardship that has overtaken us: **<sup>15</sup>** our fathers went down to Egypt, and we lived in Egypt a long time, and the Egyptians mistreated us and our fathers. **<sup>16</sup>** But when we cried out to the LORD, He heard our voice and sent an angel and brought us out from Egypt. Now behold, we are at Kadesh, a town on the edge of your territory. **<sup>17</sup>** Please let us pass through your land. We will not pass through field or vineyard, or drink water from a well. We will go along the king’s highway; we will not turn to the right or to the left until we have passed through your territory.”

**<sup>18</sup>** But Edom said to him, “You shall not pass through me, lest I come out against you with the sword.” **<sup>19</sup>** Then the sons of Israel said to him, “We will go up by the highway, and if we or our livestock drink of your water, then we will pay its price. Only let us pass through on foot—nothing more.” **<sup>20</sup>** But he said, “You shall not pass through.” And Edom came out against them with a heavy force and with a strong hand. **<sup>21</sup>** So Edom refused to allow Israel to pass through his territory; then Israel turned away from him.

**<sup>22</sup>** Now when they set out from Kadesh, the sons of Israel, the whole congregation, came to Mount Hor.

**<sup>23</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron at Mount Hor by the border of the land of Edom, saying, **<sup>24</sup>** “Aaron will be gathered to his people, for he shall not enter the land that I have given to the sons of Israel, because you rebelled against My command at the waters of Meribah. **<sup>25</sup>** Take Aaron and Eleazar his son and bring them up Mount Hor. **<sup>26</sup>** And strip Aaron of his garments and put them on Eleazar his son. So Aaron will be gathered to his people and will die there.” **<sup>27</sup>** So Moses did just as the LORD had commanded, and they went up Mount Hor in the sight of all the congregation. **<sup>28</sup>** After Moses had stripped Aaron of his garments and put them on Eleazar his son, Aaron died there on the top of the mountain. Then Moses and Eleazar came down from the mountain. **<sup>29</sup>** And when all the congregation saw that Aaron had died, all the house of Israel wept for Aaron thirty days. 

## Chapter 21

**<sup>1</sup>** Now when the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who lived in the Negev, heard that Israel was coming by the way of Atharim, he fought against Israel and took some of them captive. **<sup>2</sup>** Then Israel made a vow to the LORD and said, “If You will indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will devote their cities to destruction.” **<sup>3</sup>** The LORD listened to the voice of Israel and delivered up the Canaanites; and they devoted them and their cities to destruction. So the name of the place was called Hormah.

**<sup>4</sup>** Then they set out from Mount Hor by the way of the Sea of Reeds, to go around the land of Edom; and the soul of the people became impatient on the way. **<sup>5</sup>** The people spoke against God and against Moses: “Why have you brought us up from Egypt to die in the wilderness? For there is no bread and no water, and our soul loathes this miserable food.”

**<sup>6</sup>** Then the LORD sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people, and many men of Israel died. **<sup>7</sup>** So the people came to Moses and said, “We have sinned, for we have spoken against the LORD and against you. Pray to the LORD, that He may remove the serpents from us.” And Moses prayed for the people. **<sup>8</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Make for yourself a fiery serpent, and set it on a standard; and it shall come about, that everyone who is bitten, when he looks at it, will live.” **<sup>9</sup>** So Moses made a bronze serpent and set it on the standard, and it came about that if a serpent bit any man, when he looked at the bronze serpent, he lived.

**<sup>10</sup>** Now the sons of Israel set out and camped in Oboth. **<sup>11</sup>** Then they set out from Oboth and camped at Iye-abarim, in the wilderness which is opposite Moab, toward the sunrise. **<sup>12</sup>** From there they set out and camped in the valley of Zered. **<sup>13</sup>** From there they set out and camped on the other side of the Arnon, which is in the wilderness that comes out of the border of the Amorites—for the Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites. **<sup>14</sup>** Therefore it is said in the Book of the Wars of the LORD,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Waheb in Suphah and the wadis of the Arnon,<br/>
**<sup>15</sup>** and the slope of the wadis that extends to the settlement of Ar<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and leans to the border of Moab.”

**<sup>16</sup>** From there they continued to Beer; that is the well where the LORD said to Moses, “Assemble the people, that I may give them water.”

**<sup>17</sup>** Then Israel sang this song:<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Spring up, O well! Sing to it!<br/>
**<sup>18</sup>** The well that the leaders sank,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that the nobles of the people dug,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;with the scepter and with their staffs.”<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And from the wilderness they continued to Mattanah,<br/>
**<sup>19</sup>** and from Mattanah to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth, **<sup>20</sup>** and from Bamoth to the valley that is in the land of Moab, at the top of Pisgah, which overlooks the wasteland.

**<sup>21</sup>** Then Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, saying, **<sup>22</sup>** “Let me pass through your land. We will not turn aside into field or vineyard; we will not drink water from wells. We will go by the king’s highway until we have passed through your territory.” **<sup>23</sup>** But Sihon would not permit Israel to pass through his territory. So Sihon gathered all his people and went out against Israel in the wilderness, and came to Jahaz and fought against Israel. **<sup>24</sup>** Then Israel struck him with the edge of the sword and took possession of his land from the Arnon to the Jabbok, as far as the sons of Ammon, because the border of the sons of Ammon was fortified. **<sup>25</sup>** So Israel took all these cities, and Israel lived in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon and in all its villages. **<sup>26</sup>** For Heshbon was the city of Sihon king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab and had taken all his land out of his hand as far as the Arnon. **<sup>27</sup>** Therefore those who speak in proverbs say,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Come to Heshbon! Let it be built!<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So let the city of Sihon be established.<br/>
**<sup>28</sup>** For a fire went forth from Heshbon,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a flame from the city of Sihon;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;it devoured Ar of Moab,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The tops of the heights of the Arnon.<br/>
**<sup>29</sup>** Woe to you, O Moab!<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You are ruined, O people of Chemosh!<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He has given his sons as fugitives<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and his daughters into captivity,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to Sihon, king of the Amorites.<br/>
**<sup>30</sup>** But we have cast them down;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Heshbon is perished as far as Dibon,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and we laid waste as far as Nophah,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;which reaches to Medeba.”

**<sup>31</sup>** Thus Israel occupied the land of the Amorites. **<sup>32</sup>** Moses sent to spy out Jazer, and they captured its villages and dispossessed the Amorites who were there. **<sup>33</sup>** Then they turned and went up by the way of Bashan, and Og the king of Bashan went out against them, he and all his people, to do battle at Edrei. **<sup>34</sup>** But the LORD said to Moses, “Do not fear him, for I have given him into your hand, and all his people and his land; and you shall do to him just as you did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived at Heshbon.” **<sup>35</sup>** So they struck him and his sons and all his people, until he had no survivor left; and they possessed his land. 

## Chapter 22

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the sons of Israel set out and camped in the plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan at Jericho.

**<sup>2</sup>** And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites. **<sup>3</sup>** And Moab was exceedingly afraid of the people, because they were many; and Moab was distressed because of the sons of Israel. **<sup>4</sup>** So Moab said to the elders of Midian, “Now this assembly will lick up all that is around us, as the ox licks up the grass of the field.” And Balak the son of Zippor was king of Moab at that time. **<sup>5</sup>** So he sent messengers to Balaam the son of Beor at Pethor, which is near the River, in the land of the sons of his people, to call him, saying, “Look, a people came out of Egypt; they cover the face of the earth, and they are occupying the land next to me. **<sup>6</sup>** Now please come, curse this people for me, for they are too mighty for me. Perhaps I may be able to defeat them and drive them out of the land. For I know that whomever you bless is blessed, and whomever you curse is cursed.”

**<sup>7</sup>** So the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the fees for divination in their hand. And they came to Balaam and spoke Balak’s words to him. **<sup>8</sup>** And he said to them, “Spend the night here, and I will bring back word to you, as the LORD speaks to me.” So the princes of Moab stayed with Balaam. **<sup>9</sup>** And God came to Balaam and said, “Who are these men with you?” **<sup>10</sup>** And Balaam said to God, “Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, has sent word to me: **<sup>11</sup>** ‘Behold, the people that came out of Egypt cover the face of the earth; now come, curse them for me. Perhaps I may be able to fight against them and drive them out.’” **<sup>12</sup>** But God said to Balaam, “You shall not go with them. You shall not curse the people, for they are blessed.” **<sup>13</sup>** So Balaam rose in the morning and said to the princes of Balak, “Go back to your land, for the LORD has refused to let me go with you.” **<sup>14</sup>** And the princes of Moab rose and went to Balak and said, “Balaam refused to come with us.”

**<sup>15</sup>** Then Balak again sent princes, more numerous and more honorable than the first group. **<sup>16</sup>** And they came to Balaam and said to him, “Thus says Balak the son of Zippor, ‘Let nothing hinder you from coming to me, **<sup>17</sup>** for I will surely honor you greatly, and whatever you say to me I will do. Come then, curse this people for me.’”

**<sup>18</sup>** But Balaam answered and said to the servants of Balak, “If Balak were to give me his house full of silver and gold, I could not go beyond the word of the LORD my God, to do less or more. **<sup>19</sup>** Now please, you also stay here tonight, that I may know what more the LORD will say to me.” **<sup>20</sup>** And God came to Balaam at night and said to him, “If the men have come to call you, rise, go with them. But you shall say only the word which I speak to you.”

**<sup>21</sup>** So Balaam rose in the morning and saddled his donkey and went with the princes of Moab.

**<sup>22</sup>** But the anger of God was kindled because he went, and the angel of the LORD stood in the way as an adversary against him. Now he was riding on his donkey, and his two servants were with him. **<sup>23</sup>** And the donkey saw the angel of the LORD standing in the road with his drawn sword in his hand, and the donkey turned aside out of the road and went into the field. And Balaam struck the donkey to turn her back into the road. **<sup>24</sup>** Then the angel of the LORD stood in a narrow path between the vineyards, with a wall on both sides. **<sup>25</sup>** And the donkey saw the angel of the LORD and pressed against the wall and crushed Balaam’s foot against the wall, so he struck her again. **<sup>26</sup>** Then the angel of the LORD went farther and stood in a narrow place where there was no way to turn to the right or the left. **<sup>27</sup>** And the donkey saw the angel of the LORD and lay down under Balaam. So Balaam’s anger burned, and he struck the donkey with his staff. **<sup>28</sup>** Then the LORD opened the mouth of the donkey, and she said to Balaam, “What have I done to you, that you have struck me these three times?” **<sup>29</sup>** And Balaam said to the donkey, “Because you have made a mockery of me! If I had a sword in my hand, I would have killed you by now.” **<sup>30</sup>** And the donkey said to Balaam, “Am I not your donkey, upon which you have ridden all your life to this day? Have I ever been accustomed to do so to you?” And he said, “No.”

**<sup>31</sup>** Then the LORD opened Balaam’s eyes, and he saw the angel of the LORD standing in the road with his drawn sword in his hand. And he bowed down and fell on his face. **<sup>32</sup>** And the angel of the LORD said to him, “Why have you struck your donkey these three times? Behold, I have come out as an adversary, because your way is perverse before me. **<sup>33</sup>** And the donkey saw me and turned aside before me these three times. If she had not turned aside from me, I would surely have killed you by now and let her live.” **<sup>34</sup>** And Balaam said to the angel of the LORD, “I have sinned, for I did not know that you were standing in the road against me. Now therefore, if it is evil in your sight, I will turn back.” **<sup>35</sup>** But the angel of the LORD said to Balaam, “Go with the men, but speak only the word that I tell you.” So Balaam went with the princes of Balak. **<sup>36</sup>** Now when Balak heard that Balaam was coming, he went out to meet him at the Moabite city, which is on the border of the Arnon, at the farthest end of the territory.

**<sup>37</sup>** Then Balak said to Balaam, “Did I not send to you to call you? Why did you not come to me? Am I indeed not able to honor you?”

**<sup>38</sup>** And Balaam said to Balak, “Behold, I have come to you now! Am I able to say anything at all? The word that God puts in my mouth, that shall I speak.” **<sup>39</sup>** And Balaam went with Balak, and they came to Kiriath-huzoth. **<sup>40</sup>** And Balak sacrificed oxen and sheep and sent some to Balaam and the princes who were with him.

**<sup>41</sup>** Then in the morning Balak took Balaam and brought him up to Bamoth-baal, and from there he saw the extremity of the camp of Israel. 

## Chapter 23

**<sup>1</sup>** And Balaam said to Balak, “Build for me here seven altars, and prepare for me here seven bulls and seven rams.” **<sup>2</sup>** And Balak did just as Balaam had spoken, and Balak and Balaam offered a bull and a ram on each altar. **<sup>3</sup>** And Balaam said to Balak, “Stand beside your burnt offering, and I will go. Perhaps the LORD will come to meet me, and whatever he shows me I will tell you.” So he went to a bare height.

**<sup>4</sup>** And God met Balaam, and he said to him, “I have arranged the seven altars, and I have offered a bull and a ram on each altar.” **<sup>5</sup>** Then the LORD put a word in Balaam’s mouth and said, “Return to Balak, and tell him these words.”

**<sup>6</sup>** So he returned to him, and he was standing beside his burnt offering, he and all the princes of Moab. **<sup>7</sup>** And he took up his discourse and said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“From Aram Balak has brought me,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the king of Moab from the mountains of the east:<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘Come, curse Jacob for me,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and come, denounce Israel!’<br/>
**<sup>8</sup>** How shall I curse whom God has not cursed?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And how shall I denounce whom the LORD has not denounced?<br/>
**<sup>9</sup>** For from the top of the rocks I see him,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and from the hills I behold him;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;behold, a people dwelling alone,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and not reckoning itself among the nations.<br/>
**<sup>10</sup>** Who can count the dust of Jacob,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;or number the fourth part of Israel?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Let me die the death of the upright,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and let my end be like his!”

**<sup>11</sup>** Then Balak said to Balaam, “What have you done to me? I took you to curse my enemies, but you have blessed them instead!”

**<sup>12</sup>** And he answered and said, “Don’t I have to be careful to speak what the LORD puts in my mouth?”

**<sup>13</sup>** Then Balak said to him, “Please come with me to another place, from which you will see them. You will see only a part of them and not see them all; then curse them for me from there.” **<sup>14</sup>** So he took him to the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, and built seven altars and offered a bull and a ram on each altar. **<sup>15</sup>** And he said to Balak, “Stand here beside your burnt offering, while I meet with him over there.” **<sup>16</sup>** And the LORD met Balaam and put a word in his mouth and said, “Return to Balak, and say these words.”

**<sup>17</sup>** So he came to him, as he was standing beside his burnt offering, and the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said to him, “What has the LORD spoken?” **<sup>18</sup>** And he took up his discourse and said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Rise up, Balak, and hear;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;give ear to me, O son of Zippor:<br/>
**<sup>19</sup>** God is not a man, that he should lie,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;or a son of man, that he should change his mind.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If He has spoken, won’t He then do it?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Or when He has promised, won’t He fulfill it?<br/>
**<sup>20</sup>** Look! I received a command to bless:<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He has blessed, and I cannot revoke it.<br/>
**<sup>21</sup>** He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nor has He seen trouble in Israel.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The LORD his God is with him,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the shout of a king is among them.<br/>
**<sup>22</sup>** God brings them out of Egypt;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He is for them like the horns of the wild ox.<br/>
**<sup>23</sup>** For there is no enchantment against Jacob,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nor any divination against Israel.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Now it shall be said of Jacob and Israel,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘What has God done!’<br/>
**<sup>24</sup>** Behold, a people! As a lioness they rise up,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and as a lion they lift themselves;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;it shall not lie down until it devours the prey<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and drinks the blood of the slain.”

**<sup>25</sup>** Then Balak said to Balaam, “Do not curse them at all, and do not bless them at all!”

**<sup>26</sup>** But Balaam answered and said to Balak, “Didn’t I tell you, ‘I must say whatever the LORD tells me’?”

**<sup>27</sup>** Then Balak said to Balaam, “Come now, I will take you to another place. Perhaps it will please God that you may curse them for me from there.” **<sup>28</sup>** So Balak took Balaam to the top of Peor, which overlooks the desert. **<sup>29</sup>** And Balaam said to Balak, “Build for me seven altars here, and prepare for me here seven bulls and seven rams.” **<sup>30</sup>** So Balak did just as Balaam had said, and offered a bull and a ram on each altar. 

## Chapter 24

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Balaam saw that it was good in the eyes of the LORD to bless Israel, and he did not go, as at other times, to meet with omens, but he set his face toward the wilderness. **<sup>2</sup>** When Balaam lifted up his eyes and saw Israel dwelling tribe by tribe, the Spirit of God came upon him.

**<sup>3</sup>** And he took up his discourse and said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“The oracle of Balaam the son of Beor,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the oracle of the man whose eye is opened,<br/>
**<sup>4</sup>** the oracle of him who hears the words of God,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;who sees the vision of the Almighty,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;falling down, yet with eyes uncovered:<br/>
**<sup>5</sup>** How fair are your tents, O Jacob,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;your dwelling places, O Israel!<br/>
**<sup>6</sup>** Like valleys they are spread out,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;like gardens beside a river,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;like aloes that the LORD has planted,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;like cedars beside the waters.<br/>
**<sup>7</sup>** Water shall flow from his buckets,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and his seed shall be in many waters;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;his king shall be higher than Agag,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and his kingdom shall be exalted.<br/>
**<sup>8</sup>** God brings him out of Egypt;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;he is for him like the horns of a wild ox.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He shall devour the nations, his adversaries,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and shall break their bones in pieces<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and pierce them with his arrows.<br/>
**<sup>9</sup>** He crouched, he lay down like a lion,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and like a lioness—who will rouse him?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Blessed are those who bless you,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and cursed are those who curse you.”

**<sup>10</sup>** Then Balak’s anger was kindled against Balaam, and he struck his hands together. And Balak said to Balaam, “I called you to curse my enemies, and yet, you have blessed them these three times. **<sup>11</sup>** Now therefore, go back home. I said I would honor you greatly, but the LORD has kept you back from honor.” **<sup>12</sup>** And Balaam said to Balak, “Didn’t I speak to your messengers whom you sent to me, saying, **<sup>13</sup>** ‘Even if Balak were to give me his house full of silver and gold, I could not go beyond the word of the LORD, to do either good or bad of my own will. Whatever the LORD speaks, that is what I will speak’?

**<sup>14</sup>** And now, though I am going to my own people, come, listen while I inform you what this people will do to your people in the latter days.” **<sup>15</sup>** And he took up his discourse and said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“The oracle of Balaam the son of Beor,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the oracle of the man whose eye is opened,<br/>
**<sup>16</sup>** the oracle of him who hears the words of God,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and knows the knowledge of the Most High,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;who sees the vision of the Almighty,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;falling down, yet with eyes uncovered:<br/>
**<sup>17</sup>** I see him, but not now;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I behold him, but not near.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A star shall come out of Jacob,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and a scepter shall rise out of Israel;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;it shall crush the forehead of Moab<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and break down all the sons of Sheth.<br/>
**<sup>18</sup>** Edom shall be dispossessed;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seir also, his enemies, shall be dispossessed,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;while Israel does valiantly.<br/>
**<sup>19</sup>** And one from Jacob shall have dominion<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and destroy the survivors from the city.”<br/>
**<sup>20</sup>** And he looked on Amalek and took up his discourse and said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Amalek was the first among the nations,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but its end is utter destruction.”<br/>
**<sup>21</sup>** And he looked on the Kenite and took up his discourse and said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Enduring is your dwelling place,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and your nest is set in the rock.<br/>
**<sup>22</sup>** Nevertheless, Kain shall be burned,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;until Asshur takes you away captive.”<br/>
**<sup>23</sup>** And he took up his discourse and said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Alas, who shall live when God does this?<br/>
**<sup>24</sup>** But ships shall come from Kittim<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and shall afflict Asshur and shall afflict Eber,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and he also shall come to destruction.”

**<sup>25</sup>** Then Balaam rose and went back to his place, and Balak also went his way. 

## Chapter 25

**<sup>1</sup>** While Israel dwelled in Shittim, the people began to commit harlotry with the daughters of Moab. **<sup>2</sup>** They invited the people of Israel to the sacrifices of their gods, and the people ate and bowed down to their gods. **<sup>3</sup>** So Israel yoked himself to Baal of Peor, and the anger of the LORD burned against Israel.

**<sup>4</sup>** The LORD said to Moses, “Take all the chiefs of the people and hang them before the LORD in broad daylight, so that the fierce anger of the LORD may turn away from Israel.” **<sup>5</sup>** So Moses said to the judges of Israel, “Each of you must kill his men who have yoked themselves to Baal of Peor.”

**<sup>6</sup>** Then it happened, that one of the sons of Israel came and brought to his brothers a Midianite woman in the sight of Moses and in the sight of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, while they were weeping at the entrance of the tent of meeting. **<sup>7</sup>** When Phinehas the son of Eleazar, son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose from the midst of the congregation and took a spear in his hand. **<sup>8</sup>** He went after the man of Israel into the inner chamber and pierced both of them—the man of Israel and the woman through her belly. So the plague on the sons of Israel was stopped. **<sup>9</sup>** Those who died by the plague were twenty-four thousand.

**<sup>10</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>11</sup>** “Phinehas the son of Eleazar, son of Aaron the priest, has turned back my wrath from the sons of Israel, in that he was zealous with my zeal among them, so that I did not consume the sons of Israel in my jealousy. **<sup>12</sup>** Therefore say, ‘Behold, I give to him my covenant of peace. **<sup>13</sup>** It shall be for him and for his descendants after him, a covenant of perpetual priesthood, because he was zealous for his God and made atonement for the sons of Israel.’”

**<sup>14</sup>** The name of the man of Israel who was struck down with the Midianite woman, was Zimri the son of Salu, a chief of a tribe belonging to the Simeonites. **<sup>15</sup>** The name of the Midianite woman who was struck down was Cozbi the daughter of Zur, the head of a tribe in Midian.

**<sup>16</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>17</sup>** “Harass the Midianites and strike them down, **<sup>18</sup>** for they harassed you with their tricks, with which they deceived you in the matter of Peor and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of the chief of Midian, their sister, who was struck down on the day of the plague on account of Peor.” 

## Chapter 26

**<sup>1</sup>** After the plague, the LORD spoke to Moses and to Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Take a census of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, by their fathers’ houses, all who are able to go out to war in Israel.” **<sup>3</sup>** So Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with them in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying, **<sup>4</sup>** “Take a census from twenty years old and upward,” as the LORD commanded Moses.

Now the sons of Israel who came out of the land of Egypt were:

**<sup>5</sup>** Reuben, the firstborn of Israel. The sons of Reuben were: of Hanoch, the clan of the Hanochites; of Pallu, the clan of the Palluites; **<sup>6</sup>** of Hezron, the clan of the Hezronites; of Carmi, the clan of the Carmites. **<sup>7</sup>** These were the clans of the Reubenites, and those numbered of them were 43,730. **<sup>8</sup>** The son of Pallu: Eliab. **<sup>9</sup>** The sons of Eliab: Nemuel, Dathan, and Abiram. These are the same Dathan and Abiram, chosen from the congregation, who contended against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when they contended against the LORD, **<sup>10</sup>** and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them with Korah, when that company died, when the fire devoured 250 men. They became a warning. **<sup>11</sup>** But the sons of Korah did not die.

**<sup>12</sup>** The sons of Simeon by their clans were: of Nemuel, the clan of the Nemuelites; of Jamin, the clan of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the clan of the Jachinites; **<sup>13</sup>** of Zerah, the clan of the Zerahites; of Shaul, the clan of the Shaulites. **<sup>14</sup>** These were the clans of the Simeonites, 22,200.

**<sup>15</sup>** The sons of Gad by their clans were: of Zephon, the clan of the Zephonites; of Haggi, the clan of the Haggites; of Shuni, the clan of the Shunites; **<sup>16</sup>** of Ozni, the clan of the Oznites; of Eri, the clan of the Erites; **<sup>17</sup>** of Arod, the clan of the Arodites; of Areli, the clan of the Arelites. **<sup>18</sup>** These were the clans of the sons of Gad according to those numbered of them, 40,500.

**<sup>19</sup>** The sons of Judah were Er and Onan, but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. **<sup>20</sup>** The sons of Judah by their clans were: of Shelah, the clan of the Shelanites; of Perez, the clan of the Perezites; of Zerah, the clan of the Zerahites. **<sup>21</sup>** The sons of Perez were: of Hezron, the clan of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the clan of the Hamulites. **<sup>22</sup>** These were the clans of Judah according to those numbered of them, 76,500.

**<sup>23</sup>** The sons of Issachar by their clans were: of Tola, the clan of the Tolaites; of Puvah, the clan of the Punites; **<sup>24</sup>** of Jashub, the clan of the Jashubites; of Shimron, the clan of the Shimronites. **<sup>25</sup>** These were the clans of Issachar according to those numbered of them, 64,300.

**<sup>26</sup>** The sons of Zebulun by their clans were: of Sered, the clan of the Seredites; of Elon, the clan of the Elonites; of Jahleel, the clan of the Jahleelites. **<sup>27</sup>** These were the clans of the Zebulunites according to those numbered of them, 60,500.

**<sup>28</sup>** The sons of Joseph by their clans: Manasseh and Ephraim. **<sup>29</sup>** The sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the clan of the Machirites (and Machir fathered Gilead); of Gilead, the clan of the Gileadites. **<sup>30</sup>** These were the sons of Gilead: of Iezer, the clan of the Iezrites; of Helek, the clan of the Helekites; **<sup>31</sup>** of Asriel, the clan of the Asrielites; of Shechem, the clan of the Shechemites; **<sup>32</sup>** of Shemida, the clan of the Shemidaites; of Hepher, the clan of the Hepherites. **<sup>33</sup>** Zelophehad son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters. The names of the daughters of Zelophehad were: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. **<sup>34</sup>** These were the clans of Manasseh, and those numbered of them were 52,700.

**<sup>35</sup>** These were the sons of Ephraim by their clans: of Shuthelah, the clan of the Shuthelahites; of Becher, the clan of the Becherites; of Tahan, the clan of the Tahanites. **<sup>36</sup>** And these were the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the clan of the Eranites. **<sup>37</sup>** These were the clans of the sons of Ephraim according to those numbered of them, 32,500. These were the sons of Joseph by their clans.

**<sup>38</sup>** The sons of Benjamin by their clans were: of Bela, the clan of the Belaites; of Ashbel, the clan of the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the clan of the Ahiramites; **<sup>39</sup>** of Shephupham, the clan of the Shuphamites; of Hupham, the clan of the Huphamites. **<sup>40</sup>** The sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the clan of the Ardites; of Naaman, the clan of the Naamites. **<sup>41</sup>** These were the sons of Benjamin by their clans, and those numbered of them were 45,600.

**<sup>42</sup>** These were the sons of Dan by their clans: of Shuham, the clan of the Shuhamites. These were the clans of Dan by their clans. **<sup>43</sup>** All the clans of the Shuhamites according to those numbered of them were 64,400.

**<sup>44</sup>** The sons of Asher by their clans were: of Imnah, the clan of the Imnites; of Ishvi, the clan of the Ishvites; of Beriah, the clan of the Beriites. **<sup>45</sup>** Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the clan of the Heberites; of Malchiel, the clan of the Malchielites. **<sup>46</sup>** The name of the daughter of Asher was Serah. **<sup>47</sup>** These were the clans of the sons of Asher according to those numbered of them, 53,400.

**<sup>48</sup>** The sons of Naphtali by their clans were: of Jahzeel, the clan of the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the clan of the Gunites; **<sup>49</sup>** of Jezer, the clan of the Jezerites; of Shillem, the clan of the Shillemites. **<sup>50</sup>** These were the clans of Naphtali according to those numbered of them, 45,400.

**<sup>51</sup>** These were the sons of Israel who were numbered: 601,730.

**<sup>52</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>53</sup>** “To these the land shall be divided for inheritance according to the number of names. **<sup>54</sup>** To the larger group you shall give a larger inheritance, and to the smaller group a smaller inheritance; each shall be given its inheritance according to its numbered group. **<sup>55</sup>** However, the land shall be divided by lot; they shall inherit according to the names of the tribes of their fathers. **<sup>56</sup>** Their inheritance shall be divided by lot between the many and the few.”

**<sup>57</sup>** These were the numbered Levites by their clans: of Gershon, the clan of the Gershonites; of Kohath, the clan of the Kohathites; of Merari, the clan of the Merarites. **<sup>58</sup>** These were the clans of Levi: the clan of the Libnites, the clan of the Hebronites, the clan of the Mahlites, the clan of the Mushites, the clan of the Korahites. And Kohath fathered Amram. **<sup>59</sup>** The name of Amram’s wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt. She bore to Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister. **<sup>60</sup>** And to Aaron were born Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. **<sup>61</sup>** But Nadab and Abihu died when they offered unauthorized fire before the LORD. **<sup>62</sup>** Those numbered of them were 23,000, every male from a month old and upward. For they were not numbered among the sons of Israel, because no inheritance was given to them among the sons of Israel.

**<sup>63</sup>** These are the ones who were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho. **<sup>64</sup>** But among these there was not a man of those numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest, who had numbered the sons of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai. **<sup>65</sup>** For the LORD had said of them, “They shall surely die in the wilderness.” Not one of them was left, except Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun. 

## Chapter 27

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the daughters of Zelophehad drew near—the daughters of Zelophehad son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, from the clans of Manasseh the son of Joseph. These are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. **<sup>2</sup>** They stood before Moses and before Eleazar the priest and before the leaders and all the congregation at the entrance of the tent of meeting, saying, **<sup>3</sup>** “Our father died in the wilderness, but he was not among the company who gathered together against the LORD with Korah’s company; rather, he died in his own sin, and he had no sons. **<sup>4</sup>** Why should the name of our father be taken away from his clan because he had no son? Give us a possession among our father’s brothers.”

**<sup>5</sup>** So Moses brought their case before the LORD. **<sup>6</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, **<sup>7</sup>** “The daughters of Zelophehad are right. You shall surely give them a possession of inheritance among their father’s brothers, and you shall transfer their father’s inheritance to them. **<sup>8</sup>** And you shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, ‘If a man dies and has no son, then you shall transfer his inheritance to his daughter. **<sup>9</sup>** And if he has no daughter, then you shall give his inheritance to his brothers. **<sup>10</sup>** And if he has no brothers, then you shall give his inheritance to his father’s brothers. **<sup>11</sup>** And if his father has no brothers, then you shall give his inheritance to the nearest kinsman in his clan, and he shall possess it. And this shall be a statute of judgment for the sons of Israel, just as the LORD commanded Moses.’”

**<sup>12</sup>** Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go up into this mountain of Abarim, and look at the land that I have given to the sons of Israel. **<sup>13</sup>** When you have seen it, you also shall be gathered to your people, just as Aaron your brother was gathered, **<sup>14</sup>** because you rebelled against My word in the wilderness of Zin, during the strife of the congregation, to sanctify Me at the waters before their eyes.” (These were the waters of Meribah of Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.)

**<sup>15</sup>** Moses spoke to the LORD, saying, **<sup>16</sup>** “Let the LORD, the God of the spirits of all flesh, appoint a man over the congregation, **<sup>17</sup>** who shall go out before them and come in before them, who shall lead them out and bring them in, so that the congregation of the LORD may not be like sheep that have no shepherd.”

**<sup>18</sup>** So the LORD said to Moses, “Take Joshua son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay your hand on him. **<sup>19</sup>** Set him before Eleazar the priest and before all the congregation, and commission him in their sight. **<sup>20</sup>** You shall invest him with some of your authority, so that all the congregation of the sons of Israel may obey. **<sup>21</sup>** He shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall inquire for him by the judgment of the Urim before the LORD. At his word they shall go out, and at his word they shall come in, both he and all the sons of Israel with him, even the whole congregation.”

**<sup>22</sup>** So Moses did just as the LORD commanded him. He took Joshua and set him before Eleazar the priest and before all the congregation. **<sup>23</sup>** Then he laid his hands on him and commissioned him, just as the LORD had spoken through Moses. 

## Chapter 28

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Command the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘You shall be careful to present to Me My offering, My food for My offerings by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Me, at their appointed times.’

**<sup>3</sup>** And you shall say to them, ‘This is the offering by fire that you shall offer to the LORD: two male lambs a year old without blemish, day by day, as a regular burnt offering. **<sup>4</sup>** You shall offer the one lamb in the morning and the other lamb you shall offer at twilight, **<sup>5</sup>** together with a tenth of an ephah of fine flour for a grain offering, mixed with a quarter of a hin of beaten oil. **<sup>6</sup>** It is a regular burnt offering, which was established at Mount Sinai for a pleasing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD. **<sup>7</sup>** And its drink offering shall be a quarter of a hin for each lamb; in the holy place you shall pour out a drink offering of strong drink to the LORD. **<sup>8</sup>** The other lamb you shall offer at twilight; like the grain offering of the morning, and like its drink offering, you shall offer it, an offering by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.

**<sup>9</sup>** On the Sabbath day, two male lambs a year old without blemish, and two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour for a grain offering, mixed with oil, with its drink offering— **<sup>10</sup>** this is the burnt offering of every Sabbath, besides the regular burnt offering and its drink offering.

**<sup>11</sup>** At the beginning of your months you shall offer a burnt offering to the LORD: two bulls from the herd, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old without blemish; **<sup>12</sup>** and three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour for a grain offering, mixed with oil, for each bull; and two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour for a grain offering, mixed with oil, for the one ram; **<sup>13</sup>** and a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering for each lamb—a burnt offering, a pleasing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD. **<sup>14</sup>** And their drink offerings shall be: half a hin of wine for a bull, a third of a hin for a ram, and a quarter of a hin for a lamb; this is the monthly burnt offering throughout the months of the year. **<sup>15</sup>** Also one male goat for a sin offering to the LORD shall be offered, besides the regular burnt offering and its drink offering.

**<sup>16</sup>** On the fourteenth day of the first month is the LORD’s Passover. **<sup>17</sup>** And on the fifteenth day of this month is a feast; for seven days unleavened bread shall be eaten. **<sup>18</sup>** On the first day there shall be a holy convocation; you shall do no ordinary work. **<sup>19</sup>** And you shall offer an offering by fire, a burnt offering to the LORD: two bulls from the herd, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old. They shall be without blemish. **<sup>20</sup>** And their grain offering shall be of fine flour mixed with oil: three-tenths of an ephah you shall offer for a bull, and two-tenths for the one ram. **<sup>21</sup>** You shall offer a tenth for each of the seven lambs, **<sup>22</sup>** and one male goat for a sin offering, to make atonement for you. **<sup>23</sup>** You shall offer these besides the burnt offering of the morning, which is for a regular burnt offering. **<sup>24</sup>** You shall offer in this manner daily, for seven days, the food of an offering by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD. It shall be offered besides the regular burnt offering and its drink offering. **<sup>25</sup>** And on the seventh day you shall have a holy convocation; you shall do no ordinary work.

**<sup>26</sup>** Also on the day of the firstfruits, when you offer a grain offering of new grain to the LORD at your Feast of Weeks, you shall have a holy convocation; you shall do no ordinary work. **<sup>27</sup>** And you shall offer a burnt offering, a pleasing aroma to the LORD: two bulls from the herd, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old. **<sup>28</sup>** And their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil: three-tenths of an ephah for each bull, two-tenths for the one ram, **<sup>29</sup>** a tenth for each of the seven lambs; **<sup>30</sup>** and one male goat to make atonement for you. **<sup>31</sup>** Besides the regular burnt offering and its grain offering, you shall offer them, with their drink offerings. They shall be without blemish. 

## Chapter 29

**<sup>1</sup>** On the first day of the seventh month you shall have a sacred assembly. You shall do no ordinary work. It shall be a day for you to blow the trumpet.

**<sup>2</sup>** You shall offer a burnt offering as a pleasing aroma to the LORD: one young bull, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old, without blemish. **<sup>3</sup>** Their grain offering shall be of fine flour mixed with oil: three-tenths of an ephah for the bull, two-tenths for the ram, **<sup>4</sup>** and one-tenth for each of the seven lambs. **<sup>5</sup>** Also one male goat for a sin offering, to make atonement for you. **<sup>6</sup>** These are in addition to the burnt offering of the new moon, with its grain offering, and the regular burnt offering with its grain offering, and their drink offerings, according to the ordinance, for a pleasing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD.

**<sup>7</sup>** On the tenth day of this seventh month you shall have a sacred assembly and you shall afflict your souls. You shall do no work. **<sup>8</sup>** You shall offer a burnt offering to the LORD as a pleasing aroma: one young bull, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old, without blemish. **<sup>9</sup>** And their grain offering shall be of fine flour mixed with oil: three-tenths of an ephah for the bull, two-tenths for the one ram, **<sup>10</sup>** and one-tenth for each of the seven lambs. **<sup>11</sup>** Also one male goat for a sin offering, besides the sin offering of atonement, and the regular burnt offering and its grain offering, and their drink offerings.

**<sup>12</sup>** On the fifteenth day of the seventh month you shall have a sacred assembly. You shall do no ordinary work, and you shall celebrate a feast to the LORD for seven days. **<sup>13</sup>** You shall offer a burnt offering, an offering by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD: thirteen young bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old; they shall be without blemish. **<sup>14</sup>** And their grain offering shall be of fine flour mixed with oil: three-tenths of an ephah for each of the thirteen bulls, two-tenths for each of the two rams, **<sup>15</sup>** and one-tenth for each of the fourteen lambs; **<sup>16</sup>** also one male goat for a sin offering, besides the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.

**<sup>17</sup>** On the second day: twelve young bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish, **<sup>18</sup>** and their grain offering and drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, as prescribed; **<sup>19</sup>** also one male goat for a sin offering, besides the regular burnt offering and its grain offering, and their drink offerings.

**<sup>20</sup>** On the third day: eleven bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish, **<sup>21</sup>** and their grain offering and drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, as prescribed; **<sup>22</sup>** also one male goat for a sin offering, besides the regular burnt offering and its grain offering and its drink offering.

**<sup>23</sup>** On the fourth day: ten bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish, **<sup>24</sup>** with their grain offering and drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, as prescribed; **<sup>25</sup>** and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.

**<sup>26</sup>** On the fifth day: nine bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish, **<sup>27</sup>** with their grain offering and drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, as prescribed; **<sup>28</sup>** and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the regular burnt offering, and its grain offering and its drink offering.

**<sup>29</sup>** On the sixth day: eight bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish, **<sup>30</sup>** with their grain offering and drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, as prescribed; **<sup>31</sup>** and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the regular burnt offering, and its grain offering and its drink offering.

**<sup>32</sup>** On the seventh day: seven bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish, **<sup>33</sup>** with their grain offering and drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, as prescribed; **<sup>34</sup>** and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.

**<sup>35</sup>** On the eighth day you shall have a solemn assembly. You shall do no ordinary work. **<sup>36</sup>** You shall offer a burnt offering, an offering by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD: one bull, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old without blemish; **<sup>37</sup>** with their grain offering and drink offerings for the bull, for the ram, and for the lambs, according to their number, as prescribed; **<sup>38</sup>** and one male goat for a sin offering, besides the regular burnt offering, and its grain offering and its drink offering.

**<sup>39</sup>** These you shall offer to the LORD at your appointed times, besides your vows and your freewill offerings, for your burnt offerings, for your grain offerings, for your drink offerings, and for your peace offerings.

**<sup>40</sup>** And Moses told the sons of Israel all that the LORD had commanded Moses. 

## Chapter 30

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes of the sons of Israel, saying, “This is what the LORD has commanded: **<sup>2</sup>** If a man vows a vow to the LORD or swears an oath to bind himself with a pledge, he shall not break his word; he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.

**<sup>3</sup>** If a woman vows a vow to the LORD and binds herself by a pledge, while in her father's house in her youth, **<sup>4</sup>** and her father hears her vow and her pledge by which she has bound herself, and he says nothing to her, then all her vows shall stand, and every pledge by which she has bound herself shall stand. **<sup>5</sup>** But if her father opposes her on the day he hears it, none of her vows or pledges by which she has bound herself shall stand; and the LORD will forgive her, because her father opposed her.

**<sup>6</sup>** And if she marries while under her vows or the rash utterance of her lips by which she has bound herself, **<sup>7</sup>** and her husband hears it and says nothing to her on the day he hears it, then her vows shall stand, and her pledges by which she has bound herself shall stand. **<sup>8</sup>** But if, on the day her husband hears it, he forbids her, then he annuls her vow that is upon her and the rash utterance of her lips by which she bound herself; and the LORD will forgive her.

**<sup>9</sup>** But any vow of a widow or of a divorced woman, anything by which she has bound herself, shall stand against her.

**<sup>10</sup>** If a woman in her husband's house makes a vow or binds herself by a pledge with an oath, **<sup>11</sup>** and her husband hears of it and says nothing to her and does not oppose her, then all her vows shall stand, and every pledge by which she has bound herself shall stand. **<sup>12</sup>** But if her husband annuls them on the day he hears of them, then whatever proceeds from her lips concerning her vows or concerning the pledge of herself shall not stand; her husband has annulled them, and the LORD will forgive her.

**<sup>13</sup>** Every vow and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband may establish it, or her husband may annul it. **<sup>14</sup>** But if her husband says nothing to her from day to day, then he establishes all her vows or all her pledges that are upon her; he has established them, because he said nothing to her on the day he heard of them. **<sup>15</sup>** But if he annuls them after he has heard them, then he shall bear her guilt.

**<sup>16</sup>** These are the statutes that the LORD commanded Moses, between a man and his wife and between a father and his daughter in her youth, while in her father’s house. 

## Chapter 31

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Avenge the sons of Israel on the Midianites; afterward you shall be gathered to your people.”

**<sup>3</sup>** So Moses spoke to the people, saying, “Arm men from among you for the war, that they may go against Midian to execute the LORD’s vengeance on Midian. **<sup>4</sup>** You shall send a thousand from each tribe of all the tribes of Israel to the war.” **<sup>5</sup>** So there were conscripted from the thousands of Israel, a thousand from each tribe, twelve thousand armed for war. **<sup>6</sup>** Moses sent them to the war, a thousand from each tribe, along with Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, with the holy vessels and the trumpets for sounding in his hand.

**<sup>7</sup>** And they warred against Midian, just as the LORD had commanded Moses, and they killed every male. **<sup>8</sup>** They killed the kings of Midian along with the rest of their slain—Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba, the five kings of Midian. They also killed Balaam the son of Beor with the sword.

**<sup>9</sup>** The sons of Israel took captive the women of Midian and their little ones, and all their cattle, all their flocks, and all their goods they took as plunder. **<sup>10</sup>** Then they burned all their cities where they dwelt and all their camps with fire. **<sup>11</sup>** They took all the spoil and all the plunder, both of man and of beast. **<sup>12</sup>** And they brought the captives, the plunder, and the spoil to Moses and to Eleazar the priest and to the congregation of the sons of Israel, at the camp on the plains of Moab, which are by the Jordan at Jericho.

**<sup>13</sup>** And Moses and Eleazar the priest and all the leaders of the congregation went out to meet them outside the camp. **<sup>14</sup>** But Moses was angry with the officers of the army, the commanders of thousands and the commanders of hundreds, who came from the service in the war. **<sup>15</sup>** Moses said to them, “Have you let all the women live? **<sup>16</sup>** Look, these caused the sons of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to act treacherously against the LORD in the matter of Peor, and so the plague came upon the congregation of the LORD. **<sup>17</sup>** Now therefore, kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman who has known a man by lying with him. **<sup>18</sup>** But all the young women who have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.

**<sup>19</sup>** And you, remain outside the camp seven days; whoever has killed any person and whoever has touched any slain, purify yourselves on the third day and on the seventh day, you and your captives. **<sup>20</sup>** And purify every garment and every article of leather, every item made of goats’ hair, and every article of wood.”

**<sup>21</sup>** Then Eleazar the priest said to the men of the army who had gone to the battle, “This is the statute of the law that the LORD has commanded Moses: **<sup>22</sup>** Only the gold, the silver, the bronze, the iron, the tin, and the lead— **<sup>23</sup>** everything that can withstand fire, you shall pass through fire, and it shall be clean. Nevertheless, it shall also be purified with the water for impurity. But whatever cannot withstand fire you shall pass through water. **<sup>24</sup>** And you shall wash your clothes on the seventh day and be clean, and afterward you may come into the camp.”

**<sup>25</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>26</sup>** “Take the count of the plunder that was taken, both of man and of beast, you and Eleazar the priest and the heads of the fathers’ households of the congregation. **<sup>27</sup>** And divide the plunder into two parts: between the men skilled in war who went out to battle and all the congregation. **<sup>28</sup>** Then levy a tribute to the LORD from the men of war who went out to battle: one of every five hundred, of the persons and of the cattle and of the donkeys and of the flocks. **<sup>29</sup>** Take it from their half and give it to Eleazar the priest as a contribution to the LORD. **<sup>30</sup>** And from the sons of Israel’s half you shall take one drawn out of every fifty, of the persons, of the cattle, of the donkeys, and of the flocks, of all the animals, and give them to the Levites, who keep the charge of the tabernacle of the LORD.”

**<sup>31</sup>** And Moses and Eleazar the priest did just as the LORD had commanded Moses. **<sup>32</sup>** Now the plunder that remained of the spoil, which the men of war had taken, was 675,000 sheep, **<sup>33</sup>** 72,000 cattle, **<sup>34</sup>** 61,000 donkeys, **<sup>35</sup>** and 32,000 persons in all, of the women who had not known a man by lying with him.

**<sup>36</sup>** And the half, the portion for those who went out to war, was in number 337,500 sheep, **<sup>37</sup>** and the LORD’s tribute of the sheep was 675. **<sup>38</sup>** And the cattle were 36,000, of which the LORD’s tribute was 72. **<sup>39</sup>** And the donkeys were 30,500, of which the LORD’s tribute was 61. **<sup>40</sup>** And the persons were 16,000, of whom the LORD’s tribute was 32 persons. **<sup>41</sup>** And Moses gave the tribute, which was the LORD’s contribution, to Eleazar the priest, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>42</sup>** And from the sons of Israel’s half, which Moses divided from the men who fought— **<sup>43</sup>** now the congregation’s half was 337,500 sheep, **<sup>44</sup>** 36,000 cattle, **<sup>45</sup>** 30,500 donkeys, **<sup>46</sup>** and 16,000 persons— **<sup>47</sup>** from the sons of Israel’s half, Moses took one drawn out of every fifty, of man and of beast, and gave them to the Levites, who kept the charge of the tabernacle of the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

**<sup>48</sup>** Then the officers who were over the thousands of the army, the commanders of thousands and the commanders of hundreds, approached Moses **<sup>49</sup>** and said to Moses, “Your servants have taken a census of the men of war who are under our command, and not one man of us is missing. **<sup>50</sup>** So we have brought the LORD’s offering, what each man found, articles of gold—armlets and bracelets, signet rings, earrings and necklaces—to make atonement for ourselves before the LORD.” **<sup>51</sup>** And Moses and Eleazar the priest received the gold from them, all crafted articles.

**<sup>52</sup>** And all the gold of the contribution that they presented to the LORD, from the commanders of thousands and the commanders of hundreds, was 16,750 shekels. **<sup>53</sup>** (The men of war had taken plunder, each for himself.) **<sup>54</sup>** And Moses and Eleazar the priest received the gold from the commanders of thousands and of hundreds and brought it into the tent of meeting as a memorial for the sons of Israel before the LORD. 

## Chapter 32

**<sup>1</sup>** Now the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad had a very great multitude of livestock. And they saw the land of Jazer and the land of Gilead, and behold, the place was a place for livestock. **<sup>2</sup>** So the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben came and said to Moses and to Eleazar the priest and to the leaders of the congregation, saying, **<sup>3</sup>** “Ataroth, Dibon, Jazer, Nimrah, Heshbon, Elealeh, Sebam, Nebo, and Beon, **<sup>4</sup>** the land which the LORD struck before the congregation of Israel, is a land for livestock, and your servants have livestock.” **<sup>5</sup>** Then they said, “If we have found favor in your eyes, let this land be given to your servants for a possession. Do not bring us over the Jordan.”

**<sup>6</sup>** But Moses said to the sons of Gad and to the sons of Reuben, “Shall your brothers go to war while you sit here? **<sup>7</sup>** Why will you discourage the heart of the sons of Israel from crossing into the land which the LORD has given them? **<sup>8</sup>** This is what your fathers did when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to see the land. **<sup>9</sup>** For when they went up to the valley of Eshcol and saw the land, they discouraged the heart of the sons of Israel from going into the land that the LORD had given them. **<sup>10</sup>** So the LORD’s anger was kindled on that day, and He swore, saying, **<sup>11</sup>** ‘None of the men who came up from Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land that I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, because they have not wholly followed Me— **<sup>12</sup>** except Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite and Joshua the son of Nun, for they have wholly followed the LORD.’ **<sup>13</sup>** And the LORD’s anger was kindled against Israel, and He made them wander in the wilderness forty years until all the generation that had done evil in the sight of the LORD was consumed. **<sup>14</sup>** And behold, you have risen in your fathers’ place, a brood of sinful men, to increase still more the fierce anger of the LORD against Israel. **<sup>15</sup>** For if you turn away from following Him, He will again leave them in the wilderness, and you will destroy all this people.”

**<sup>16</sup>** Then they came near to him and said, “We will build sheepfolds here for our livestock and cities for our little ones, **<sup>17</sup>** but we ourselves will be armed and ready to go before the sons of Israel until we have brought them to their place. And our little ones shall dwell in the fortified cities because of the inhabitants of the land. **<sup>18</sup>** We will not return to our homes until each of the sons of Israel has received his inheritance. **<sup>19</sup>** For we will not inherit with them on the other side of the Jordan and beyond, because our inheritance has come to us on this side of the Jordan toward the east.”

**<sup>20</sup>** So Moses said to them, “If you will do this—if you will arm yourselves before the LORD for the war, **<sup>21</sup>** and every armed man of you will cross the Jordan before the LORD until He has driven His enemies from before Him, **<sup>22</sup>** and the land is subdued before the LORD—then afterward you shall return and be free from obligation to the LORD and to Israel. And this land shall be your possession before the LORD. **<sup>23</sup>** But if you will not do so, behold, you have sinned against the LORD, and be sure your sin will find you out. **<sup>24</sup>** Build cities for your little ones and folds for your sheep, and do what has proceeded out of your mouth.”

**<sup>25</sup>** And the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben said to Moses, “Your servants will do just as my lord commands. **<sup>26</sup>** Our little ones, our wives, our livestock, and all our cattle shall be there in the cities of Gilead, **<sup>27</sup>** but your servants will cross over, every man armed for war, before the LORD to battle, just as my lord says.”

**<sup>28</sup>** So Moses gave orders concerning them to Eleazar the priest and to Joshua the son of Nun and to the heads of the fathers’ households of the tribes of the sons of Israel. **<sup>29</sup>** And Moses said to them, “If the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben cross over the Jordan with you, every man armed for battle before the LORD, and the land is subdued before you, then you shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession. **<sup>30</sup>** But if they do not cross over armed with you, then they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan.” **<sup>31</sup>** And the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben answered, saying, “What the LORD has said to your servants, we will do. **<sup>32</sup>** We will cross over armed before the LORD into the land of Canaan, and the possession of our inheritance shall remain with us on this side of the Jordan.”

**<sup>33</sup>** So Moses gave to them—to the sons of Gad, to the sons of Reuben, and to the half-tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph—the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land with its cities and their territories, the cities of the surrounding land.

**<sup>34</sup>** And the sons of Gad built Dibon, Ataroth, Aroer, **<sup>35</sup>** Atroth-shophan, Jazer, Jogbehah, **<sup>36</sup>** Beth-nimrah, and Beth-haran, fortified cities and sheepfolds. **<sup>37</sup>** And the sons of Reuben built Heshbon, Elealeh, Kiriathaim, **<sup>38</sup>** Nebo, and Baal-meon (their names being changed), and Sibmah. And they gave other names to the cities which they built.

**<sup>39</sup>** And the sons of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead and took it and dispossessed the Amorites who were in it. **<sup>40</sup>** So Moses gave Gilead to Machir the son of Manasseh, and he dwelt in it. **<sup>41</sup>** And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took their villages and called them Havvoth-jair. **<sup>42</sup>** And Nobah went and took Kenath and its villages and called it Nobah after his own name. 

## Chapter 33

**<sup>1</sup>** These are the journeys of the sons of Israel, who came out from the land of Egypt by their divisions under the hand of Moses and Aaron. **<sup>2</sup>** Moses recorded their starting points according to their journeys at the command of the LORD, and these are their journeys according to their starting points:

**<sup>3</sup>** They set out from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month. On the day after the Passover, the sons of Israel went out with a high hand before the eyes of all the Egyptians, **<sup>4</sup>** while the Egyptians were burying all their firstborn, whom the LORD had struck down among them. The LORD had also executed judgments against their gods. **<sup>5</sup>** So the sons of Israel set out from Rameses and camped at Succoth. **<sup>6</sup>** They set out from Succoth and camped at Etham, which is on the edge of the wilderness. **<sup>7</sup>** They set out from Etham and turned back to Pi-hahiroth, which faces Baal-zephon, and they camped before Migdol. **<sup>8</sup>** They set out from Pi-hahiroth and passed through the midst of the sea into the wilderness, and they went a three days’ journey in the wilderness of Etham and camped at Marah. **<sup>9</sup>** They set out from Marah and came to Elim; and in Elim there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees, and they camped there. **<sup>10</sup>** They set out from Elim and camped by the Red Sea. **<sup>11</sup>** They set out from the Red Sea and camped in the wilderness of Sin. **<sup>12</sup>** They set out from the wilderness of Sin and camped at Dophkah. **<sup>13</sup>** They set out from Dophkah and camped at Alush. **<sup>14</sup>** They set out from Alush and camped at Rephidim, and there was no water for the people to drink. **<sup>15</sup>** They set out from Rephidim and camped in the wilderness of Sinai. **<sup>16</sup>** They set out from the wilderness of Sinai and camped at Kibroth-hattaavah. **<sup>17</sup>** They set out from Kibroth-hattaavah and camped at Hazeroth. **<sup>18</sup>** They set out from Hazeroth and camped at Rithmah. **<sup>19</sup>** They set out from Rithmah and camped at Rimmon-perez. **<sup>20</sup>** They set out from Rimmon-perez and camped at Libnah. **<sup>21</sup>** They set out from Libnah and camped at Rissah. **<sup>22</sup>** They set out from Rissah and camped at Kehelathah. **<sup>23</sup>** They set out from Kehelathah and camped at Mount Shepher. **<sup>24</sup>** They set out from Mount Shepher and camped at Haradah. **<sup>25</sup>** They set out from Haradah and camped at Makheloth. **<sup>26</sup>** They set out from Makheloth and camped at Tahath. **<sup>27</sup>** They set out from Tahath and camped at Terah. **<sup>28</sup>** They set out from Terah and camped at Mithkah. **<sup>29</sup>** They set out from Mithkah and camped at Hashmonah. **<sup>30</sup>** They set out from Hashmonah and camped at Moseroth. **<sup>31</sup>** They set out from Moseroth and camped at Bene-jaakan. **<sup>32</sup>** They set out from Bene-jaakan and camped at Hor-haggidgad. **<sup>33</sup>** They set out from Hor-haggidgad and camped at Jotbathah. **<sup>34</sup>** They set out from Jotbathah and camped at Abronah. **<sup>35</sup>** They set out from Abronah and camped at Ezion-geber. **<sup>36</sup>** They set out from Ezion-geber and camped in the wilderness of Zin, that is, Kadesh. **<sup>37</sup>** They set out from Kadesh and camped at Mount Hor, at the edge of the land of Edom.

**<sup>38</sup>** Then Aaron the priest went up Mount Hor at the command of the LORD and died there in the fortieth year after the sons of Israel had come out of the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first day of the month. **<sup>39</sup>** Aaron was one hundred twenty-three years old when he died on Mount Hor.

**<sup>40</sup>** Now the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who dwelt in the Negev in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the sons of Israel. **<sup>41</sup>** They set out from Mount Hor and camped at Zalmonah. **<sup>42</sup>** They set out from Zalmonah and camped at Punon. **<sup>43</sup>** They set out from Punon and camped at Oboth. **<sup>44</sup>** They set out from Oboth and camped at Iye-abarim, on the border of Moab. **<sup>45</sup>** They set out from Iye-abarim and camped at Dibon-gad. **<sup>46</sup>** They set out from Dibon-gad and camped at Almon-diblathaim. **<sup>47</sup>** They set out from Almon-diblathaim and camped in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo. **<sup>48</sup>** They set out from the mountains of Abarim and camped in the plains of Moab, by the Jordan at Jericho. **<sup>49</sup>** They camped by the Jordan, from Beth-jeshimoth as far as Abel-shittim in the plains of Moab.

**<sup>50</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying, **<sup>51</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘When you cross over the Jordan into the land of Canaan, **<sup>52</sup>** then you shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you, and destroy all their carved images, and destroy all their molten images, and demolish all their high places. **<sup>53</sup>** You shall take possession of the land and dwell in it, for I have given the land to you to possess it. **<sup>54</sup>** You shall divide the land by lot as an inheritance among your clans; to the larger you shall give a larger inheritance, and to the smaller you shall give a smaller inheritance. Wherever the lot falls for anyone, that shall be his. You shall inherit according to the tribes of your fathers. **<sup>55</sup>** But if you do not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you, then those whom you let remain shall be as barbs in your eyes and thorns in your sides, and they shall trouble you in the land in which you dwell. **<sup>56</sup>** And it shall come to pass that as I planned to do to them, so I will do to you.’” 

## Chapter 34

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Command the sons of Israel and say to them: When you enter the land of Canaan, this is the land that shall fall to you as an inheritance, the land of Canaan according to its boundaries. **<sup>3</sup>** Your southern border shall extend from the wilderness of Zin alongside Edom, and your southern border shall be from the end of the Salt Sea on the east. **<sup>4</sup>** Your border shall turn south of the ascent of Akrabbim and pass on to Zin, and its end shall be south of Kadesh-barnea. Then it shall reach to Hazar-addar and pass on to Azmon. **<sup>5</sup>** The border shall turn from Azmon to the Brook of Egypt, and its end shall be at the sea.

**<sup>6</sup>** As for the western border, you shall have the Great Sea as a boundary; this shall be your western border.

**<sup>7</sup>** This shall be your northern border: from the Great Sea you shall draw a line to Mount Hor. **<sup>8</sup>** From Mount Hor you shall draw a line to the entrance of Hamath, and the end of the border shall be at Zedad. **<sup>9</sup>** Then the border shall continue to Ziphron, and its end shall be at Hazar-enan. This shall be your northern border.

**<sup>10</sup>** You shall draw your eastern border from Hazar-enan to Shepham. **<sup>11</sup>** The border shall go down from Shepham to Riblah on the east side of Ain, and the border shall go down and reach to the slope on the eastern side of the Sea of Chinnereth. **<sup>12</sup>** Then the border shall go down to the Jordan, and its end shall be at the Salt Sea. This shall be your land according to its borders all around.”

**<sup>13</sup>** Moses commanded the sons of Israel, saying, “This is the land that you shall inherit by lot, which the LORD has commanded to give to the nine tribes and to the half-tribe. **<sup>14</sup>** For the tribe of the sons of Reuben according to their fathers’ houses and the tribe of the sons of Gad according to their fathers’ houses have received their inheritance, and the half-tribe of Manasseh has received its inheritance. **<sup>15</sup>** The two and a half tribes have received their inheritance across the Jordan opposite Jericho, eastward toward the sunrise.”

**<sup>16</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>17</sup>** “These are the names of the men who shall divide the land for you as an inheritance: Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun. **<sup>18</sup>** And you shall take one leader from every tribe to divide the land for the inheritance. **<sup>19</sup>** These are the names of the men: of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh; **<sup>20</sup>** of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Ammihud; **<sup>21</sup>** of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon; **<sup>22</sup>** of the tribe of the sons of Dan, a leader, Bukki the son of Jogli; **<sup>23</sup>** of the sons of Joseph: of the tribe of the sons of Manasseh, a leader, Hanniel the son of Ephod; **<sup>24</sup>** and of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim, a leader, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan; **<sup>25</sup>** of the tribe of the sons of Zebulun, a leader, Elizaphan the son of Parnach; **<sup>26</sup>** of the tribe of the sons of Issachar, a leader, Paltiel the son of Azzan; **<sup>27</sup>** of the tribe of the sons of Asher, a leader, Ahihud the son of Shelomi; **<sup>28</sup>** and of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali, a leader, Pedahel the son of Ammihud.” **<sup>29</sup>** These are the ones whom the LORD commanded to divide the inheritance for the sons of Israel in the land of Canaan. 

## Chapter 35

**<sup>1</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Command the sons of Israel that they give to the Levites from the inheritance of their possession cities in which to dwell. You shall also give to the Levites pasture lands around the cities. **<sup>3</sup>** The cities shall be for them to dwell in, and their pasture lands shall be for their livestock and for their possessions and for all their animals. **<sup>4</sup>** The pasture lands of the cities, which you shall give to the Levites, shall extend from the wall of the city outward a thousand cubits all around. **<sup>5</sup>** You shall measure outside the city on the east side two thousand cubits, on the south side two thousand cubits, on the west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand cubits, the city being in the center. This shall be for them the pasture lands of the cities. **<sup>6</sup>** The cities which you shall give to the Levites shall be the six cities of refuge, which you shall give so that the manslayer who kills someone unintentionally may flee there. And in addition to them you shall give forty-two cities. **<sup>7</sup>** All the cities which you shall give to the Levites shall be forty-eight cities, together with their pasture lands. **<sup>8</sup>** As for the cities which you shall give from the possession of the sons of Israel, from the larger tribes you shall take many, and from the smaller you shall take few. Each tribe shall give from its inheritance to the Levites in proportion to the inheritance that it receives.”

**<sup>9</sup>** The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, **<sup>10</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘When you cross the Jordan into the land of Canaan, **<sup>11</sup>** then you shall select cities for yourselves to be cities of refuge, so that the manslayer who kills someone unintentionally may flee there. **<sup>12</sup>** The cities shall be for you a refuge from the avenger, so that the manslayer will not die until he stands before the congregation for judgment. **<sup>13</sup>** The cities which you are to give shall be your six cities of refuge. **<sup>14</sup>** You shall give three cities across the Jordan and three cities in the land of Canaan; they shall be cities of refuge. **<sup>15</sup>** These six cities shall be for refuge for the sons of Israel, for the foreigner, and for the temporary resident among them, so that anyone who kills a person unintentionally may flee there. **<sup>16</sup>** But if he struck him with an iron object, so that he died, he is a murderer; the murderer shall surely be put to death. **<sup>17</sup>** And if he struck him with a stone in the hand, by which he might die, and he died, he is a murderer; the murderer shall surely be put to death. **<sup>18</sup>** Or if he struck him with a wooden object in the hand, by which he might die, and he died, he is a murderer; the murderer shall surely be put to death. **<sup>19</sup>** The avenger of blood himself shall put the murderer to death. When he meets him, he shall put him to death. **<sup>20</sup>** If he pushed him out of hatred, or threw something at him with premeditation, and he died, **<sup>21</sup>** or struck him with his hand in enmity, and he died, the one who struck him shall surely be put to death. He is a murderer. The avenger of blood shall put the murderer to death when he meets him. **<sup>22</sup>** But if he pushed him suddenly without enmity, or threw something at him without lying in wait, **<sup>23</sup>** or with any stone by which a man might die, without seeing him, and it fell on him so that he died, though he was not his enemy and did not seek his harm, **<sup>24</sup>** then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the avenger of blood according to these ordinances. **<sup>25</sup>** The congregation shall rescue the manslayer from the hand of the avenger of blood, and the congregation shall restore him to his city of refuge to which he fled. And he shall dwell in it until the death of the high priest who was anointed with the holy oil. **<sup>26</sup>** But if the manslayer at any time goes beyond the border of his city of refuge to which he fled, **<sup>27</sup>** and the avenger of blood finds him outside the border of his city of refuge, and the avenger of blood kills the manslayer, he shall not be guilty of blood, **<sup>28</sup>** because he should have stayed in his city of refuge until the death of the high priest. But after the death of the high priest the manslayer may return to the land of his possession.

**<sup>29</sup>** These things shall be a statute of judgment for you throughout your generations in all your dwellings. **<sup>30</sup>** If anyone kills a man, the murderer shall be put to death on the evidence of multiple witnesses. But no one shall be put to death on the testimony of only one witness. **<sup>31</sup>** Moreover, you shall not accept a ransom for the life of a murderer who is guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to death. **<sup>32</sup>** And you shall not accept a ransom for one who has fled to his city of refuge, that he may return to dwell in the land before the death of the high priest. **<sup>33</sup>** So you shall not pollute the land in which you are; for blood pollutes the land, and no atonement can be made for the land for the blood that is shed in it, except by the blood of the one who shed it. **<sup>34</sup>** You shall not defile the land in which you are living, in the midst of which I dwell; for I, the LORD, dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel.” 

## Chapter 36

**<sup>1</sup>** The heads of the fathers’ houses of the clan of the sons of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, from the clans of the sons of Joseph, came near and spoke before Moses and before the leaders, the heads of the fathers’ houses of the sons of Israel. **<sup>2</sup>** They said, “The LORD commanded my lord to give the land for inheritance by lot to the sons of Israel, and my lord was commanded by the LORD to give the inheritance of our brother Zelophehad to his daughters. **<sup>3</sup>** But if they marry any of the sons of the other tribes of the sons of Israel, then their inheritance will be taken away from the inheritance of our fathers and will be added to the inheritance of the tribe into which they are received; so it will be taken away from the lot of our inheritance. **<sup>4</sup>** And when the Jubilee of the sons of Israel comes, then their inheritance will be added to the inheritance of the tribe into which they are received; so their inheritance will be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.”

**<sup>5</sup>** Then Moses commanded the sons of Israel by the word of the LORD, saying, “The tribe of the sons of Joseph is right in what they are saying. **<sup>6</sup>** This is what the LORD has commanded concerning the daughters of Zelophehad: ‘Let them marry whom they think best, only they must marry within the clan of the tribe of their father.’ **<sup>7</sup>** So no inheritance of the sons of Israel shall be transferred from tribe to tribe, for each man of the sons of Israel shall hold to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers. **<sup>8</sup>** And every daughter who possesses an inheritance in any tribe of the sons of Israel shall be wife to one of the clan of the tribe of her father, so that every man of the sons of Israel may possess the inheritance of his fathers. **<sup>9</sup>** Thus no inheritance shall be transferred from one tribe to another tribe, for each man of the tribes of the sons of Israel shall hold to his own inheritance.” **<sup>10</sup>** As the LORD commanded Moses, so the daughters of Zelophehad did. **<sup>11</sup>** Mahlah, Tirzah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, married the sons of their uncles. **<sup>12</sup>** They were married into the clans of the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the clan of their father.

**<sup>13</sup>** These are the commandments and the ordinances which the LORD commanded through Moses to the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho. 