# The Book of Joshua

## Chapter 1

**<sup>1</sup>** After the death of Moses, the servant of the LORD, the LORD spoke to Joshua son of Nun, Moses’ assistant, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Moses, my servant, is dead. Now arise, cross over this river, the Jordan—you and all this people—into the land that I am giving to them, the sons of Israel. **<sup>3</sup>** Every place on which the sole of your foot treads, I have given to you, just as I promised Moses. **<sup>4</sup>** From the wilderness and Lebanon, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates—all the land of the Hittites—and to the Great Sea, where the sun sets, shall be your territory. **<sup>5</sup>** No man shall be able to stand before you all the days of your life. Just as I was with Moses, so I will be with you; I will not abandon you or forsake you. **<sup>6</sup>** Be strong and courageous, for you shall cause this people to inherit the land that I swore to their fathers to give to them. **<sup>7</sup>** Only be strong and very courageous, being careful to do according to all the law that Moses my servant commanded you. Do not turn from it to the right or to the left, so that you may succeed wherever you go. **<sup>8</sup>** This book of the law shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall meditate on it day and night, so that you may be careful to do according to all that is written in it. For then you will make your way prosperous, and then you will succeed. **<sup>9</sup>** Have I not commanded you? Be strong and courageous! Do not be afraid or dismayed, for the LORD your God is with you wherever you go.”

**<sup>10</sup>** Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying, **<sup>11</sup>** “Pass through the midst of the camp and command the people: ‘Prepare provisions for yourselves, for in three days you will cross the Jordan river to go in to take possession of the land that the LORD your God is giving you to possess.’”

**<sup>12</sup>** And to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joshua said, **<sup>13</sup>** “Remember the word that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, saying, ‘The LORD your God is giving you rest and is giving you this land.’ **<sup>14</sup>** Your wives, your little ones, and your livestock shall remain in the land that Moses gave you beyond the Jordan, but you—all the men of valor—shall cross over armed, before your brothers, and help them, **<sup>15</sup>** until the LORD gives rest to your brothers, as He has to you, and they also possess the land that the LORD your God is giving them. Then you shall return to your own land and take possession of it, the land that Moses the servant of the LORD gave you beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise.”

**<sup>16</sup>** And they answered Joshua, saying, “All that you have commanded us we will do, and wherever you send us we will go. **<sup>17</sup>** Just as we obeyed Moses in everything, so we will obey you. Only may the LORD your God be with you, as He was with Moses. **<sup>18</sup>** Anyone who rebels against your command and does not obey your words in all that you command him shall be put to death. Only be strong and courageous.” 

## Chapter 2

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Joshua son of Nun secretly sent two men from Shittim as spies, saying, “Go, look over the land, especially Jericho.” So they went and entered the house of a prostitute named Rahab and stayed there. **<sup>2</sup>** But it was reported to the king of Jericho: “Look, some men from the sons of Israel have come here tonight to scout out the land.” **<sup>3</sup>** So the king of Jericho sent word to Rahab: “Bring out the men who came to you, who entered your house, for they have come to spy out the whole land.”

**<sup>4</sup>** But the woman had taken the two men and hidden them. She said, “Yes, the men came to me, but I didn’t know where they were from. **<sup>5</sup>** And at dusk, when the gate was about to be shut, the men went out. I don’t know where they went. Pursue them quickly, for you may overtake them.” **<sup>6</sup>** (She had, however, taken them up to the roof and hidden them under stalks of flax she had laid out on the roof.) **<sup>7</sup>** So the men pursued them along the road to the Jordan river, as far as the fords. And as soon as the pursuers had gone out, the gate was shut.

**<sup>8</sup>** Before the men lay down, she went up to them on the roof **<sup>9</sup>** and said to them, “I know that the Lord has given you the land, and that fear of you has fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land melt away before you. **<sup>10</sup>** For we have heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red Sea before you when you came out of Egypt, and what you did to the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan ruber—Sihon and Og—whom you devoted to destruction. **<sup>11</sup>** And as soon as we heard it, our hearts melted, and no spirit remained in any man because of you. For the Lord your God, He is God in the heavens above and on the earth below. **<sup>12</sup>** Now therefore, please swear to me by the Lord that, as I have shown you kindness, you also will show kindness to my father’s house—and give me a sure sign— **<sup>13</sup>** that you will spare the lives of my father, my mother, my brothers, my sisters, and all who belong to them, and that you will deliver our lives from death.”

**<sup>14</sup>** So the men said to her, “Our lives for yours, even to death. If you do not report this business of ours, then when the Lord gives us the land, we will deal kindly and faithfully with you.”

**<sup>15</sup>** Then she let them down by a rope through the window, for her house was built into the city wall; she lived in the wall. **<sup>16</sup>** And she said to them, “Go to the hills, so that the pursuers may not find you. Hide there for three days until they return; then afterward you may go on your way.”

**<sup>17</sup>** The men said to her, “We will be released from this oath you made us swear, **<sup>18</sup>** unless, when we enter the land, you tie this scarlet cord in the window through which you let us down, and unless you gather your father, your mother, your brothers, and all your father’s household into your house. **<sup>19</sup>** If anyone goes out of the doors of your house into the street, his blood shall be on his own head, and we will be innocent. But if anyone is with you in the house and is harmed, his blood shall be on our head. **<sup>20</sup>** But if you report this business of ours, then we shall be released from the oath you made us swear.”

**<sup>21</sup>** She said, “Let it be according to your words.” So she sent them away, and they departed. And she tied the scarlet cord in the window.

**<sup>22</sup>** They departed and went into the hills and remained there three days, until the pursuers returned. The pursuers searched all along the way but did not find them. **<sup>23</sup>** Then the two men returned. They came down from the hills, crossed over, and came to Joshua son of Nun, and they recounted to him all that had happened to them. **<sup>24</sup>** And they said to Joshua, “Truly the Lord has given all the land into our hands, and moreover, all the inhabitants of the land melt away before us.” 

## Chapter 3

**<sup>1</sup>** Joshua rose early in the morning, and he and all the sons of Israel set out from Shittim. They came to the Jordan river, and they lodged there before crossing over. **<sup>2</sup>** And it came to pass after three days that the officers went through the midst of the camp, **<sup>3</sup>** and they commanded the people, saying, “When you see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the Levitical priests bearing it, then you shall set out from your place and follow it. **<sup>4</sup>** Yet you shall keep a distance between you and it—about two thousand cubits. Do not come near it, so that you may know the way you should go, for you have not passed this way before.”

**<sup>5</sup>** Then Joshua said to the people, “Consecrate yourselves, for tomorrow the LORD will do wonders among you.” **<sup>6</sup>** And Joshua spoke to the priests, saying, “Take up the ark of the covenant and cross over ahead of the people.” So they took up the ark of the covenant and went ahead of the people.

**<sup>7</sup>** The LORD said to Joshua, “This day I will begin to exalt you in the eyes of all Israel, so that they will know that just as I was with Moses, I will be with you. **<sup>8</sup>** And you shall command the priests who bear the ark of the covenant, saying, ‘When you come to the edge of the waters of the Jordan, you shall stand still in the Jordan.’”

**<sup>9</sup>** Then Joshua said to the sons of Israel, “Come here and listen to the words of the LORD your God.” **<sup>10</sup>** And Joshua said, “By this you shall know that the living God is among you, and that He will certainly drive out the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Hivite, the Perizzite, the Girgashite, the Amorite, and the Jebusite from before you. **<sup>11</sup>** See, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth is about to cross over ahead of you into the Jordan. **<sup>12</sup>** So now, take for yourselves twelve men from the tribes of Israel, one man from each tribe. **<sup>13</sup>** And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests who bear the ark of the LORD, the Lord of all the earth, come to rest in the waters of the Jordan river, the waters of the Jordan will be cut off—the waters flowing down from above—and they will stand in a heap.”

**<sup>14</sup>** So it happened, when the people set out from their tents to cross the Jordan river, with the priests bearing the ark of the covenant ahead of the people, **<sup>15</sup>** and when those bearing the ark came as far as the Jordan river, and the feet of the priests bearing the ark dipped in the edge of the water (now the Jordan river overflows all its banks throughout the time of harvest), **<sup>16</sup>** then the waters that were flowing down from above stood still; they rose up in a large heap far off at Adam, the city beside Zarethan, and those flowing down toward the Sea of the Arabah (the Salt Sea) were completely cut off. So the people crossed over opposite Jericho.

**<sup>17</sup>** And the priests who bore the ark of the covenant of the LORD stood firmly on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan river, and all Israel crossed over on dry ground, until the entire nation had completed crossing the Jordan river. 

## Chapter 4

**<sup>1</sup>** When the entire nation had finished crossing the Jordan river, the Lord said to Joshua, **<sup>2</sup>** “Take twelve men from among the people, one man from each tribe, **<sup>3</sup>** and command them: ‘Take up twelve stones from here out of the middle of the Jordan river, from the exact place where the priests’ feet stood firmly, and carry them with you. Lay them down in the place where you will lodge tonight.’” **<sup>4</sup>** So Joshua summoned the twelve men whom he had appointed from the sons of Israel, one man from each tribe. **<sup>5</sup>** And Joshua said to them, “Pass on before the ark of the Lord your God into the midst of the Jordan, and each of you lift a stone onto his shoulder, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel, **<sup>6</sup>** so that this may be a sign among you. When your sons ask in time to come, ‘What do these stones mean to you?’ **<sup>7</sup>** then you shall tell them that the waters of the Jordan river were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the Lord. When it passed over the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were cut off. So these stones shall be a memorial for the sons of Israel forever.”

**<sup>8</sup>** And the sons of Israel did just as Joshua commanded. They took up twelve stones out of the midst of the Jordan river, as the Lord had spoken to Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel. They carried them with them to the lodging place and laid them down there. **<sup>9</sup>** And Joshua set up twelve stones from the midst of the Jordan, in the spot where the feet of the priests bearing the ark of the covenant had stood. They remain there to this day.

**<sup>10</sup>** Now the priests carrying the ark stood in the middle of the Jordan river until everything had been completed that the Lord commanded Joshua to tell the people, according to all that Moses had commanded Joshua. And the people hurried and crossed over. **<sup>11</sup>** And when all the people had finished crossing, the ark of the Lord and the priests crossed over before the people. **<sup>12</sup>** The sons of Reuben, the sons of Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh crossed over in battle formation before the sons of Israel, as Moses had told them. **<sup>13</sup>** About forty thousand men, equipped for war, crossed over before the Lord for battle, into the plains of Jericho.

**<sup>14</sup>** On that day the Lord exalted Joshua in the sight of all Israel, and they held him in awe all the days of his life, just as they had held Moses in awe. **<sup>15</sup>** And the Lord said to Joshua, **<sup>16</sup>** “Command the priests who bear the ark of the testimony to come up out of the Jordan river.” **<sup>17</sup>** So Joshua commanded the priests, “Come up out of the Jordan river.” **<sup>18</sup>** And when the priests bearing the ark of the covenant of the Lord came up from the midst of the Jordan river, and the soles of the priests’ feet were lifted onto dry ground, the waters of the Jordan returned to their place and overflowed all its banks as before.

**<sup>19</sup>** The people came up from the Jordan river on the tenth day of the first month, and they encamped at Gilgal, to the east of Jericho. **<sup>20</sup>** And those twelve stones which they had taken from the Jordan, Joshua set up at Gilgal. **<sup>21</sup>** He said to the sons of Israel, “When your sons ask their fathers in time to come, saying, ‘What are these stones?’ **<sup>22</sup>** then you shall let your sons know, ‘Israel crossed over this Jordan river on dry ground here.’ **<sup>23</sup>** For the Lord your God dried up the waters of the Jordan for you until you had crossed over, just as the Lord your God did to the Red Sea, which He dried up before us until we had crossed. **<sup>24</sup>** He did this so that all the nations of the earth may know that the hand of the Lord is mighty, so that you may fear the Lord your God all your days.” 

## Chapter 5

**<sup>1</sup>** When all the kings of the Amorites west of the Jordan and all the kings of the Canaanites who were by the sea heard how the Lord had dried up the waters of the Jordan before the Israelites until they had crossed over, their hearts melted. There was no spirit left in them because of the Israelites.

**<sup>2</sup>** At that time the Lord said to Joshua, “Make flint knives and circumcise the sons of Israel again a second time.” **<sup>3</sup>** So Joshua made flint knives and circumcised the sons of Israel at Gibeath-haaraloth. **<sup>4</sup>** This is the reason Joshua circumcised them: all the males who came out of Egypt—all the warriors—had died in the wilderness on the way after they had come out of Egypt. **<sup>5</sup>** Though all the people who came out had been circumcised, all the people born in the wilderness along the way after they had come out of Egypt had not been circumcised. **<sup>6</sup>** For the Israelites had walked forty years in the wilderness until all the nation—the men of war who came out of Egypt—perished, because they did not obey the voice of the Lord. The Lord swore to them that He would not let them see the land that He had sworn to their fathers to give us, a land flowing with milk and honey. **<sup>7</sup>** So He raised up their sons in their place; these Joshua circumcised. For they were uncircumcised, because they had not been circumcised along the way. **<sup>8</sup>** When they had finished circumcising the entire nation, they stayed in their places in the camp until they had healed. **<sup>9</sup>** Then the Lord said to Joshua, “Today I have rolled away the reproach of Egypt from you.” So the name of that place is called Gilgal to this day.

**<sup>10</sup>** While the Israelites were encamped at Gilgal, they kept the Passover on the evening of the fourteenth day of the month on the plains of Jericho. **<sup>11</sup>** And on the day after the Passover, on that very day, they ate of the produce of the land—unleavened bread and roasted grain. **<sup>12</sup>** And the manna ceased the day after they ate from the produce of the land. There was no longer manna for the Israelites, and they ate from the yield of the land of Canaan that year.

**<sup>13</sup>** When Joshua was near Jericho, he looked up and saw a man standing in front of him with a drawn sword in his hand. Joshua approached him and said, “Are you for us or for our adversaries?” **<sup>14</sup>** He said, “No, but I am the commander of the army of the Lord. I have now come.” Then Joshua fell face down to the ground and worshiped, and he said to him, “What does my lord say to his servant?” **<sup>15</sup>** The commander of the Lord’s army said to Joshua, “Take off your sandals from your feet, for the place where you are standing is holy.” And Joshua did so. 

## Chapter 6

**<sup>1</sup>** Now Jericho was tightly shut up because of the sons of Israel; no one went out, and no one came in. **<sup>2</sup>** Then the LORD said to Joshua, “See, I have handed Jericho over to you, with its king and valiant warriors. **<sup>3</sup>** You shall march around the city, all the men of war circling the city once. Do this for six days. **<sup>4</sup>** And seven priests shall carry seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark. On the seventh day, you shall march around the city seven times, and the priests shall blow the trumpets. **<sup>5</sup>** When they make a long blast with the ram’s horn, and when you hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout; then the wall of the city will fall down flat, and the people shall go up, each straight ahead.”

**<sup>6</sup>** So Joshua the son of Nun summoned the priests and said to them, “Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests carry seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the LORD.” **<sup>7</sup>** And he said to the people, “Advance and march around the city, and the armed men shall go ahead of the ark of the LORD.”

**<sup>8</sup>** And just as Joshua had commanded the people, the seven priests carrying the seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the LORD advanced and blew the trumpets, and the ark of the covenant of the LORD followed them. **<sup>9</sup>** The armed men went before the priests who blew the trumpets, and the rear guard followed behind the ark while the trumpets kept sounding. **<sup>10</sup>** But Joshua had commanded the people, saying, “You shall not shout, nor let your voice be heard, nor let a word proceed from your mouth until the day I tell you to shout—then you shall shout!” **<sup>11</sup>** So he had the ark of the LORD circle the city once, and they came back to the camp and spent the night there.

**<sup>12</sup>** Joshua got up early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the LORD. **<sup>13</sup>** The seven priests carrying the seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the LORD went on continually and blew the trumpets, and the armed men went ahead of them, and the rear guard followed the ark of the LORD while the trumpets kept sounding. **<sup>14</sup>** So on the second day they marched around the city once and returned to the camp. They did this for six days.

**<sup>15</sup>** Then on the seventh day they rose early, at daybreak, and marched around the city in the same manner seven times—only on that day they marched around the city seven times. **<sup>16</sup>** And the seventh time, when the priests blew the trumpets, Joshua said to the people, “Shout! For the LORD has given you the city. **<sup>17</sup>** And the city shall be devoted to the LORD for destruction, it and all that is in it. Only Rahab the prostitute and all who are with her in the house shall live, because she hid the messengers we sent. **<sup>18</sup>** But as for you, keep yourselves from the things devoted to destruction, so that you do not covet them and take any of the devoted things, and make the camp of Israel liable to destruction and bring trouble upon it. **<sup>19</sup>** But all the silver and gold, and vessels of bronze and iron, are holy to the LORD; they shall go into the treasury of the LORD.”

**<sup>20</sup>** So the people shouted, and the trumpets were blown. And it happened that when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, they raised a great shout, and the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, each straight ahead, and they captured the city. **<sup>21</sup>** They devoted to destruction by the edge of the sword all that was in the city, both man and woman, young and old, ox and sheep and donkey.

**<sup>22</sup>** But Joshua said to the two men who had spied out the land, “Go into the house of the woman, the prostitute, and bring out the woman and all who belong to her, as you swore to her.” **<sup>23</sup>** So the young men who had been spies went in and brought out Rahab and her father and her mother and her brothers and all who belonged to her—they also brought out all her relatives—and they set them outside the camp of Israel. **<sup>24</sup>** Then they burned the city with fire, and everything in it. Only the silver and gold, and the vessels of bronze and iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the LORD. **<sup>25</sup>** But Rahab the prostitute, and her father’s household and all who belonged to her, Joshua spared; and she has lived in the midst of Israel to this day, because she hid the messengers whom Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.

**<sup>26</sup>** At that time Joshua made them take an oath, saying, “Cursed before the LORD is the man who rises up and rebuilds this city, Jericho; at the cost of his firstborn he shall lay its foundation, and at the cost of his youngest he shall set up its gates.” **<sup>27</sup>** So the LORD was with Joshua, and his fame was in all the land. 

## Chapter 7

**<sup>1</sup>** But the sons of Israel acted unfaithfully with regard to the devoted things, for Achan son of Karmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took some of the devoted things; so the anger of the LORD burned against the sons of Israel.

**<sup>2</sup>** Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is near Beth-aven, east of Bethel, and said to them, “Go up and spy out the land.” So the men went up and spied out Ai. **<sup>3</sup>** They returned to Joshua and said to him, “Do not have all the people go up; let about two or three thousand men go up and attack Ai. Do not trouble all the people there, for they are few.” **<sup>4</sup>** So about three thousand men from the people went up there, but they fled before the men of Ai. **<sup>5</sup>** The men of Ai struck down about thirty-six of them, chasing them from the city gate as far as Shebarim and striking them down on the descent. As a result, the hearts of the people melted and became like water.

**<sup>6</sup>** Then Joshua tore his clothes and fell to the ground on his face before the ark of the LORD until evening—he and the elders of Israel. And they put dust on their heads. **<sup>7</sup>** Joshua said, “Alas, Lord GOD, why did You ever bring this people across the Jordan at all—to hand us over into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? If only we had been content to dwell beyond the Jordan! **<sup>8</sup>** O Lord, what can I say now that Israel has turned its back before its enemies? **<sup>9</sup>** For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land will hear of it; they will surround us and cut off our name from the earth. Then what will You do for Your great name?”

**<sup>10</sup>** The LORD said to Joshua, “Stand up! Why have you fallen on your face? **<sup>11</sup>** Israel has sinned; indeed, they have transgressed My covenant that I commanded them. They have even taken some of the devoted things, and have stolen, deceived, and put them among their own belongings. **<sup>12</sup>** Therefore, the sons of Israel cannot stand before their enemies; they turn their backs before their enemies, because they have become devoted to destruction. I will not be with you anymore unless you destroy the devoted thing from your midst. **<sup>13</sup>** Get up! Consecrate the people and say, ‘Consecrate yourselves for tomorrow, for thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: There is a devoted thing in your midst, O Israel. You cannot stand before your enemies until you remove the devoted thing from among you. **<sup>14</sup>** In the morning, you shall come forward by your tribes. And it shall be that the tribe which the LORD selects shall come forward clan by clan, and the clan which the LORD selects shall come forward household by household, and the household which the LORD selects shall come forward man by man. **<sup>15</sup>** And the one who is caught with the devoted thing shall be burned with fire, he and all that belongs to him, because he has transgressed the covenant of the LORD and because he has committed an outrage in Israel.’”

**<sup>16</sup>** So Joshua rose early in the morning and brought Israel near tribe by tribe, and the tribe of Judah was selected. **<sup>17</sup>** He brought near the clans of Judah, and the clan of the Zerahites was selected. Then he brought near the clan of the Zerahites man by man, and Zabdi was selected. **<sup>18</sup>** He brought near his household man by man, and Achan son of Karmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was selected.

**<sup>19</sup>** Then Joshua said to Achan, “My son, give glory to the LORD, the God of Israel, and give Him praise, and tell me what you have done; do not hide it from me.”

**<sup>20</sup>** Achan answered Joshua and said, “Truly I have sinned against the LORD, the God of Israel, and this is what I did: **<sup>21</sup>** When I saw among the spoils a beautiful cloak from Shinar, two hundred shekels of silver, and a bar of gold weighing fifty shekels, I coveted them and took them. And look, they are hidden in the ground inside my tent, with the silver beneath it.”

**<sup>22</sup>** So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran to the tent, and there it was, hidden in his tent with the silver beneath it. **<sup>23</sup>** They took them from inside the tent and brought them to Joshua and to all the sons of Israel, and they laid them out before the LORD.

**<sup>24</sup>** Then Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan son of Zerah, and the silver, the cloak, and the bar of gold, and his sons, his daughters, his oxen, donkeys, and sheep, his tent, and all that belonged to him; and they brought them up to the Valley of Achor.

**<sup>25</sup>** Joshua said, “Why have you troubled us? The LORD will trouble you this day.” Then all Israel stoned him with stones, and they burned them with fire after they had stoned them with stones. **<sup>26</sup>** They raised over him a great heap of stones that stands to this day. Then the LORD turned from the fierceness of His anger. Therefore, the name of that place has been called the Valley of Achor to this day. 

## Chapter 8

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the Lord said to Joshua, “Do not be afraid or dismayed. Take all the men of war with you and rise up, go to Ai. Look, I have given the king of Ai, his people, his city, and his land into your hand. **<sup>2</sup>** You shall do to Ai and its king just as you did to Jericho and its king, except that you may take its spoil and its livestock as plunder for yourselves. Set an ambush against the city behind it.”

**<sup>3</sup>** So Joshua arose with all the people of war to go up to Ai. He chose thirty thousand mighty men of valor and sent them out by night. **<sup>4</sup>** He commanded them, saying, “See, you shall lie in ambush behind the city. Don’t go very far from it, and all of you stay alert. **<sup>5</sup>** I and all the people who are with me will approach the city. When they come out to meet us as they did before, we will flee before them. **<sup>6</sup>** They will pursue us until we have drawn them away from the city, for they will say, ‘They are fleeing before us just like last time.’ So we will flee before them, **<sup>7</sup>** and then you will rise up from the ambush and seize the city, for the Lord your God will give it into your hand. **<sup>8</sup>** When you have taken the city, set it on fire, according to the word of the Lord. See, I have commanded you.”

**<sup>9</sup>** So Joshua sent them out, and they went to the place of ambush and stayed between Bethel and Ai, west of Ai. But Joshua spent that night among the people.

**<sup>10</sup>** Joshua rose early in the morning and mustered the people. He went up with the elders of Israel before the people to Ai. **<sup>11</sup>** All the men of war who were with him went up and drew near the city, and they camped north of Ai, with a valley between them and the city. **<sup>12</sup>** He had taken about five thousand men and set them in ambush between Bethel and Ai, west of the city. **<sup>13</sup>** So the main camp was north of the city, with the rear guard west of it. And Joshua spent that night in the valley.

**<sup>14</sup>** When the king of Ai saw this, the men of the city hurried and rose early to go out to battle against Israel at the appointed place, facing the Arabah. But he did not know that there was an ambush behind the city. **<sup>15</sup>** And Joshua and all Israel pretended to be beaten before them and fled toward the wilderness. **<sup>16</sup>** All the people in the city were called together to pursue them, and they pursued Joshua and were drawn away from the city. **<sup>17</sup>** Not a man was left in Ai or Bethel who did not go out after Israel, and they left the city open and pursued Israel.

**<sup>18</sup>** Then the Lord said to Joshua, “Stretch out the javelin that is in your hand toward Ai, for I will give it into your hand.” So Joshua stretched out the javelin in his hand toward the city. **<sup>19</sup>** As soon as he did, the men in ambush rose quickly from their position and ran. They entered the city, captured it, and hurried to set it on fire. **<sup>20</sup>** When the men of Ai turned and looked back, they saw smoke rising from the city into the sky. They had no strength to flee in any direction. Then the people of Israel who had been fleeing turned back against their pursuers. **<sup>21</sup>** When Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city and that the smoke was rising from it, they turned back and struck down the men of Ai. **<sup>22</sup>** The others came out from the city to meet them, so they were caught in the middle, with Israelites on both sides. They struck them down so that none survived or escaped. **<sup>23</sup>** But they seized the king of Ai alive and brought him to Joshua.

**<sup>24</sup>** When Israel had finished killing all the inhabitants of Ai in the field and in the wilderness where they had pursued them, and when they had all fallen by the edge of the sword until they were destroyed, then all Israel returned to Ai and struck it down with the sword. **<sup>25</sup>** All who fell that day, both men and women, were twelve thousand—all the people of Ai. **<sup>26</sup>** Joshua did not draw back his hand with the javelin until he had devoted to destruction all who lived in Ai. **<sup>27</sup>** However, Israel took the livestock and the spoils of that city as plunder for themselves, according to the word of the Lord that he had commanded Joshua. **<sup>28</sup>** So Joshua burned Ai and made it a heap of ruins forever—a desolation to this day. **<sup>29</sup>** He hanged the king of Ai on a tree until evening. At sunset, Joshua commanded that they take his corpse down from the tree, and they threw it at the entrance of the city gate and raised a great heap of stones over it, which remains to this day.

**<sup>30</sup>** Then Joshua built an altar to the Lord, the God of Israel, on Mount Ebal, **<sup>31</sup>** just as Moses the servant of the Lord had commanded the sons of Israel, as it is written in the Book of the Law of Moses: an altar of uncut stones on which no iron tool had been used. They offered burnt offerings to the Lord on it and sacrificed peace offerings. **<sup>32</sup>** And there, in the presence of the Israelites, he wrote on the stones a copy of the Law of Moses, which he had written.

**<sup>33</sup>** All Israel, with their elders and officers and judges, stood on either side of the ark before the Levitical priests who carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord, both the foreigner and the native. Half of them stood in front of Mount Gerizim and half in front of Mount Ebal, just as Moses the servant of the Lord had commanded to bless the people of Israel first. **<sup>34</sup>** Afterward, he read all the words of the law—the blessing and the curse—according to all that is written in the Book of the Law. **<sup>35</sup>** There was not a word of all that Moses commanded that Joshua did not read before all the assembly of Israel, including the women, the little ones, and the sojourners who lived among them. 

## Chapter 9

**<sup>1</sup>** When all the kings who were beyond the Jordan—in the hill country, in the lowland, and along the entire coast of the Great Sea toward Lebanon (the Hittite, the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite)—heard of this, **<sup>2</sup>** they gathered together as one to fight against Joshua and Israel.

**<sup>3</sup>** But when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and to Ai, **<sup>4</sup>** they acted craftily. They went and prepared provisions and took worn-out sacks for their donkeys, and wineskins worn out, torn, and patched, **<sup>5</sup>** and worn-out and patched sandals on their feet, and worn-out garments on themselves. All the bread of their provisions was dry and crumbled. **<sup>6</sup>** And they went to Joshua at the camp in Gilgal and said to him and to the men of Israel, “We have come from a far country; now therefore, make a covenant with us.”

**<sup>7</sup>** But the men of Israel said to the Hivites, “Perhaps you live among us; then how can we make a covenant with you?” **<sup>8</sup>** They said to Joshua, “We are your servants.” And Joshua said to them, “Who are you, and where do you come from?”

**<sup>9</sup>** They said to him, “Your servants have come from a very distant country because of the name of the LORD your God. For we have heard a report about Him and all that He did in Egypt, **<sup>10</sup>** and all that He did to the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan—to Sihon king of Heshbon and to Og king of Bashan, who was in Ashtaroth. **<sup>11</sup>** So our elders and all the inhabitants of our land said to us, ‘Take provisions in your hand for the journey and go to meet them and say to them, “We are your servants. Now then, make a covenant with us.”’ **<sup>12</sup>** This bread of ours was warm when we took it from our houses as our provision on the day we left to come to you, but now behold, it is dry and crumbled. **<sup>13</sup>** These wineskins were new when we filled them, and behold, they are torn. These garments and sandals of ours are worn out because of the very long journey.”

**<sup>14</sup>** So the men of Israel took some of their provisions, but did not inquire of the LORD. **<sup>15</sup>** And Joshua made peace with them and made a covenant with them to let them live, and the leaders of the congregation swore an oath to them.

**<sup>16</sup>** And it came about at the end of three days after they had made a covenant with them, that they heard they were their neighbors and were living among them. **<sup>17</sup>** Then the sons of Israel set out and came to their cities on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kiriath-jearim. **<sup>18</sup>** But the sons of Israel did not strike them, because the leaders of the congregation had sworn to them by the LORD, the God of Israel. And all the congregation grumbled against the leaders.

**<sup>19</sup>** But all the leaders said to the whole congregation, “We have sworn to them by the LORD, the God of Israel, and now we cannot touch them. **<sup>20</sup>** This we will do to them: let them live, lest wrath be upon us because of the oath that we swore to them.”

**<sup>21</sup>** So the leaders said to them, “Let them live.” Thus they became cutters of wood and drawers of water for the whole congregation, just as the leaders had spoken to them.

**<sup>22</sup>** Then Joshua summoned them and said, “Why did you deceive us, saying, ‘We are very far from you,’ when you are living among us? **<sup>23</sup>** Now therefore, you are cursed, and none of you shall cease to be slaves—cutters of wood and drawers of water—for the house of my God.”

**<sup>24</sup>** And they answered Joshua and said, “Because it was clearly told to your servants that the LORD your God had commanded His servant Moses to give you all the land and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land before you, so we feared greatly for our lives because of you, and we did this thing. **<sup>25</sup>** Now behold, we are in your hand. Do as it seems good and right in your eyes to deal with us.”

**<sup>26</sup>** So he did this to them and delivered them from the hand of the sons of Israel, and they did not kill them. **<sup>27</sup>** But on that day Joshua made them cutters of wood and drawers of water for the congregation and for the altar of the LORD, to this day, in the place that He would choose. 

## Chapter 10

**<sup>1</sup>** When Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem heard that Joshua had captured Ai and utterly destroyed it—doing to Ai and its king just as he had done to Jericho and its king—and that the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel and were living among them, **<sup>2</sup>** he feared greatly. Gibeon was a great city, like one of the royal cities, and it was greater than Ai, and all its men were warriors. **<sup>3</sup>** So Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem sent word to Hoham king of Hebron, to Piram king of Jarmuth, to Japhia king of Lachish, and to Debir king of Eglon, saying, **<sup>4</sup>** “Come up to me and help me, and let us strike Gibeon, for it has made peace with Joshua and with the sons of Israel.” **<sup>5</sup>** So the five kings of the Amorites—the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon—gathered together and went up with all their armies, and they encamped against Gibeon and made war against it.

**<sup>6</sup>** Then the men of Gibeon sent word to Joshua at the camp in Gilgal, saying, “Do not abandon your servants. Come up to us quickly and save us and help us, for all the kings of the Amorites who dwell in the hill country have assembled against us.” **<sup>7</sup>** So Joshua went up from Gilgal, he and all the people of war with him, and all the mighty men of valor. **<sup>8</sup>** And the Lord said to Joshua, “Do not be afraid of them, for I have given them into your hand. Not a man of them shall stand before you.” **<sup>9</sup>** So Joshua came upon them suddenly, having marched all night from Gilgal.

**<sup>10</sup>** And the Lord threw them into confusion before Israel, and He struck them with a great blow at Gibeon and pursued them by the way of the ascent of Beth-horon, and struck them as far as Azekah and Makkedah. **<sup>11</sup>** And as they fled before Israel, while they were going down the ascent of Beth-horon, the Lord hurled down large stones from the sky upon them as far as Azekah, and they died. More died from the hailstones than the sons of Israel killed with the sword.

**<sup>12</sup>** Then Joshua spoke to the Lord on the day the Lord gave the Amorites over to the sons of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel:

“Sun, stand still at Gibeon,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and Moon, in the Valley of Aijalon.”

**<sup>13</sup>** And the sun stood still, and the moon stopped, until the nation took vengeance on their enemies. Is this not written in the Book of Jashar? The sun stopped in the midst of the sky and did not hasten to go down for about a full day. **<sup>14</sup>** There has been no day like it before or since, when the Lord listened to the voice of a man, for the Lord fought for Israel. **<sup>15</sup>** Then Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to the camp at Gilgal.

**<sup>16</sup>** Now these five kings fled and hid themselves in the cave at Makkedah. **<sup>17</sup>** And it was told to Joshua, “The five kings have been found, hidden in the cave at Makkedah.” **<sup>18</sup>** Joshua said, “Roll large stones against the mouth of the cave and set men by it to guard them. **<sup>19</sup>** But you—do not stay there. Pursue your enemies and attack them from behind. Do not let them enter their cities, for the Lord your God has given them into your hand.”

**<sup>20</sup>** When Joshua and the sons of Israel had finished striking them with a very great blow until they were wiped out, and the survivors who escaped had entered the fortified cities, **<sup>21</sup>** all the people returned safely to Joshua at the camp at Makkedah. No one dared to speak a word against the sons of Israel.

**<sup>22</sup>** Then Joshua said, “Open the mouth of the cave and bring out those five kings to me from the cave.” **<sup>23</sup>** So they brought out those five kings to him from the cave: the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon. **<sup>24</sup>** When they had brought those kings out to Joshua, he called for all the men of Israel and said to the chiefs of the men of war who had gone with him, “Come near, put your feet on the necks of these kings.” So they came near and put their feet on their necks. **<sup>25</sup>** Then Joshua said to them, “Do not be afraid or dismayed. Be strong and courageous, for thus the Lord will do to all your enemies against whom you fight.” **<sup>26</sup>** And afterward Joshua struck them and put them to death, and he hanged them on five trees. They hung on the trees until evening. **<sup>27</sup>** But at the time of sunset Joshua gave the command, and they took them down from the trees and threw them into the cave where they had hidden themselves, and they set large stones against the mouth of the cave, which remain to this very day.

**<sup>28</sup>** Joshua captured Makkedah on that day and struck it and its king with the edge of the sword. He devoted to destruction every living person in it; he left no survivor. And he did to the king of Makkedah just as he had done to the king of Jericho.

**<sup>29</sup>** Then Joshua and all Israel with him passed on from Makkedah to Libnah and fought against Libnah. **<sup>30</sup>** And the Lord gave it also into the hand of Israel, and he struck it and its king with the edge of the sword. He left no survivor in it, and he did to its king just as he had done to the king of Jericho.

**<sup>31</sup>** Then Joshua and all Israel with him passed on from Libnah to Lachish, and he encamped against it and fought against it. **<sup>32</sup>** And the Lord gave Lachish into the hand of Israel, and he captured it on the second day and struck it with the edge of the sword, and every living person in it, just as he had done to Libnah. **<sup>33</sup>** Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish, and Joshua struck him and his people, until he left him no survivor.

**<sup>34</sup>** Then Joshua and all Israel with him passed on from Lachish to Eglon, and they encamped against it and fought against it. **<sup>35</sup>** And they captured it on that day and struck it with the edge of the sword, and he devoted every living person in it to destruction on that day, just as he had done to Lachish.

**<sup>36</sup>** Then Joshua and all Israel with him went up from Eglon to Hebron, and they fought against it. **<sup>37</sup>** And they captured it and struck it with the edge of the sword, and its king and its towns, and every living person in it. He left no survivor, just as he had done to Eglon, and he devoted it to destruction and every living person in it.

**<sup>38</sup>** Then Joshua and all Israel with him turned back to Debir and fought against it. **<sup>39</sup>** And he captured it, its king, and all its towns, and they struck them with the edge of the sword and devoted to destruction every living person in it. He left no survivor. Just as he had done to Hebron, and as he had done to Libnah and its king, so he did to Debir and its king.

**<sup>40</sup>** So Joshua struck the whole land—the hill country, the Negev, the lowland, and the slopes—and all their kings. He left no survivor, but devoted to destruction everything that breathed, just as the Lord, the God of Israel, had commanded. **<sup>41</sup>** And Joshua struck them from Kadesh-barnea as far as Gaza, and the whole land of Goshen as far as Gibeon. **<sup>42</sup>** Joshua captured all these kings and their land at one time, because the Lord, the God of Israel, fought for Israel. **<sup>43</sup>** Then Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to the camp at Gilgal. 

## Chapter 11

**<sup>1</sup>** When Jabin, king of Hazor, heard of this, he sent to Jobab, king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph, **<sup>2</sup>** and to the kings who were in the northern hill country, and in the Arabah south of Chinneroth, and in the lowland, and in the hill country of Dor on the west, **<sup>3</sup>** to the Canaanites in the east and the west, the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, and the Jebusites in the hill country, and the Hivites under Hermon, in the land of Mizpah. **<sup>4</sup>** And they came out, with all their troops, a great horde, in number like the sand that is on the seashore, with very many horses and chariots. **<sup>5</sup>** And all these kings joined their forces and came and encamped together at the waters of Merom to fight against Israel.

**<sup>6</sup>** And the Lord said to Joshua, "Do not be afraid of them, for tomorrow at this time I will give them all over, slain, to Israel. You shall hamstring their horses and burn their chariots with fire." **<sup>7</sup>** So Joshua and all his warriors came suddenly against them by the waters of Merom and fell upon them. **<sup>8</sup>** And the Lord gave them into the hand of Israel, who struck them and chased them as far as Great Sidon and Misrephoth-maim and eastward as far as the valley of Mizpah. And they struck them until he left none remaining. **<sup>9</sup>** And Joshua did to them just as the Lord said to him: he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots with fire.

**<sup>10</sup>** And Joshua turned back at that time and captured Hazor and struck its king with the sword, for Hazor formerly was the head of all those kingdoms. **<sup>11</sup>** And they struck with the sword all who were in it, devoting them to destruction; there was none left that breathed. And he burned Hazor with fire. **<sup>12</sup>** And all the cities of those kings and all their kings Joshua captured and struck them with the sword, devoting them to destruction, just as Moses the servant of the Lord had commanded. **<sup>13</sup>** But none of the cities that stood on mounds did Israel burn, except Hazor alone; Joshua burned that one. **<sup>14</sup>** And all the spoil of these cities and the livestock, the people of Israel took for their plunder. But every person they struck with the sword, until they had destroyed them, and they did not leave any who breathed. **<sup>15</sup>** As the Lord had commanded his servant Moses, so Moses commanded Joshua, and that's what Joshua did. He left nothing undone of all that the Lord had commanded Moses.

**<sup>16</sup>** So Joshua took all that land: the hill country, and all the Negev, and all the land of Goshen, and the lowland, and the Arabah, and the hill country of Israel and its lowland **<sup>17</sup>** from Mount Halak, which rises toward Seir, as far as Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon below Mount Hermon. And he captured all their kings and struck them and put them to death. **<sup>18</sup>** Joshua made war a long time with all those kings. **<sup>19</sup>** There was not a city that made peace with the people of Israel except the Hivites, the inhabitants of Gibeon. They took them all in battle. **<sup>20</sup>** For it was the Lord's doing to harden their hearts that they should come against Israel in battle, in order that they should be devoted to destruction and should receive no mercy but be destroyed, just as the Lord commanded Moses.

**<sup>21</sup>** And Joshua came at that time and cut off the Anakim from the hill country, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the hill country of Judah, and from all the hill country of Israel. Joshua devoted them to destruction with their cities. **<sup>22</sup>** And there was none of the Anakim left in the land of the people of Israel. Only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod did some remain. **<sup>23</sup>** So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the Lord had spoken to Moses. And Joshua gave it for an inheritance to Israel according to their tribal allotments. And the land had rest from war. 

## Chapter 12

**<sup>1</sup>** These are the kings of the land whom the sons of Israel struck down and took possession of their land beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise, from the Wadi Arnon to Mount Hermon, and all the Arabah eastward:

**<sup>2</sup>** Sihon, king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon, ruled from Aroer, which is on the edge of the Wadi Arnon, and from the middle of the valley, and half of Gilead, as far as the Wadi Jabbok, the border of the sons of Ammon; **<sup>3</sup>** and the Arabah to the Sea of Kinnereth eastward, and as far as the Sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea, eastward in the direction of Beth Jeshimoth, and southward to the foot of the slopes of Pisgah.

**<sup>4</sup>** And the territory of Og king of Bashan, one of the remnant of the Rephaim, who lived at Ashtaroth and at Edrei, **<sup>5</sup>** and ruled over Mount Hermon and Salecah and all Bashan, as far as the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and half of Gilead, as far as the border of Sihon king of Heshbon. **<sup>6</sup>** Moses the servant of the LORD and the sons of Israel struck them down; and Moses the servant of the LORD gave it as a possession to the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh.

**<sup>7</sup>** These are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the sons of Israel struck down on the west side of the Jordan, from Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon even to Mount Halak, which goes up to Seir; and Joshua gave it as a possession to the tribes of Israel according to their divisions, **<sup>8</sup>** in the hill country and in the lowland, in the Arabah, in the slopes and in the wilderness, and in the Negev — the land of the Hittite, the Amorite, and the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite:

**<sup>9</sup>** the king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one; **<sup>10</sup>** the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one; **<sup>11</sup>** the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one; **<sup>12</sup>** the king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one; **<sup>13</sup>** the king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one; **<sup>14</sup>** the king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one; **<sup>15</sup>** the king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one; **<sup>16</sup>** the king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one; **<sup>17</sup>** the king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one; **<sup>18</sup>** the king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one; **<sup>19</sup>** the king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one; **<sup>20</sup>** the king of Shimron-meron, one; the king of Achshaph, one; **<sup>21</sup>** the king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one; **<sup>22</sup>** the king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam in Carmel, one; **<sup>23</sup>** the king of Dor in the heights of Dor, one; the king of Goiim in Gilgal, one; **<sup>24</sup>** the king of Tirzah, one — in all, thirty-one kings. 

## Chapter 13

**<sup>1</sup>** Now Joshua was old and advanced in years, and the LORD said to him, “You are old and advanced in years, and much of the land remains to be possessed. **<sup>2</sup>** This is the land that remains: all the regions of the Philistines and all those of the Geshurites, **<sup>3</sup>** from Shihor, which is east of Egypt, to the border of Ekron to the north—it is counted as Canaanite; there are five rulers of the Philistines: the Gazites, the Ashdodites, the Ashkelonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites. Also the Avvim **<sup>4</sup>** in the south; all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that belongs to the Sidonians, as far as Aphek, to the border of the Amorites; **<sup>5</sup>** and the land of the Gebalites, all of Lebanon, toward the sunrise, from Baal-gad below Mount Hermon to Lebo-hamath. **<sup>6</sup>** All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon to Misrephoth-maim, all the Sidonians—I will drive them out from before the sons of Israel; only allot it to Israel for an inheritance, just as I have commanded you. **<sup>7</sup>** Now divide this land as an inheritance to the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasseh.”

**<sup>8</sup>** With the other half-tribe, the Reubenites and the Gadites received their inheritance, which Moses gave them beyond the Jordan to the east, just as Moses the servant of the LORD gave them: **<sup>9</sup>** from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, with the city that is in the middle of the valley, and all the plain of Medeba as far as Dibon; **<sup>10</sup>** and all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, up to the border of the sons of Ammon; **<sup>11</sup>** and Gilead, and the territory of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and all Mount Hermon, and all Bashan as far as Salecah; **<sup>12</sup>** all the kingdom of Og in Bashan, who reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei—he alone remained of the remnant of the Rephaim—and Moses had defeated them and driven them out. **<sup>13</sup>** But the sons of Israel did not drive out the Geshurites or the Maacathites; so Geshur and Maacath dwell among Israel to this day.

**<sup>14</sup>** Only to the tribe of Levi he gave no inheritance; the offerings by fire to the LORD, the God of Israel, are their inheritance, just as He said to them.

**<sup>15</sup>** Moses gave an inheritance to the tribe of the sons of Reuben according to their clans. **<sup>16</sup>** Their territory was from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, with the city that is in the middle of the valley, and all the plain by Medeba; **<sup>17</sup>** Heshbon and all its towns that are in the plain: Dibon, Bamoth-baal, and Beth-baal-meon, **<sup>18</sup>** and Jahaz, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath, **<sup>19</sup>** and Kiriathaim, and Sibmah, and Zereth-shahar on the hill of the valley, **<sup>20</sup>** and Beth-peor, and the slopes of Pisgah, and Beth-jeshimoth; **<sup>21</sup>** all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses struck down with the chiefs of Midian: Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba, the princes of Sihon, dwelling in the land. **<sup>22</sup>** And Balaam the son of Beor, the one who practiced divination, the sons of Israel killed with the sword among the rest of their slain. **<sup>23</sup>** The border of the sons of Reuben was the Jordan as a boundary. This was the inheritance of the sons of Reuben according to their clans, with the cities and their villages.

**<sup>24</sup>** Moses also gave an inheritance to the tribe of Gad, to the sons of Gad according to their clans. **<sup>25</sup>** Their territory was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the sons of Ammon, as far as Aroer, which is before Rabbah; **<sup>26</sup>** and from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh and Betonim, and from Mahanaim to the border of Debir; **<sup>27</sup>** and in the valley, Beth-haram, and Beth-nimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, with the Jordan as a boundary, as far as the end of the Sea of Chinnereth east of the Jordan. **<sup>28</sup>** This was the inheritance of the sons of Gad according to their clans, with the cities and their villages.

**<sup>29</sup>** Moses also gave an inheritance to the half-tribe of Manasseh, and it was for the half-tribe of the sons of Manasseh according to their clans. **<sup>30</sup>** Their territory was from Mahanaim, all of Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan, sixty cities; **<sup>31</sup>** and half of Gilead, and Ashtaroth and Edrei, the cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were for the sons of Machir the son of Manasseh, for half of the sons of Machir according to their clans.

**<sup>32</sup>** These are the inheritances that Moses distributed in the plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan east of Jericho. **<sup>33</sup>** But to the tribe of Levi Moses gave no inheritance; the LORD, the God of Israel, is their inheritance, just as He said to them. 

## Chapter 14

**<sup>1</sup>** These are the allotments that the sons of Israel received in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of the tribes of the sons of Israel distributed to them. **<sup>2</sup>** Their inheritance was assigned by lot, just as the Lord had commanded through Moses, for the nine tribes and the half-tribe. **<sup>3</sup>** For Moses had given the inheritance of the two tribes and the half-tribe beyond the Jordan, but he gave no inheritance among them to the Levites. **<sup>4</sup>** For the sons of Joseph became two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim, and they gave no portion to the Levites in the land, except cities in which to live, with their pasture lands for their livestock and possessions. **<sup>5</sup>** Just as the Lord had commanded Moses, so the sons of Israel did; and they divided the land.

**<sup>6</sup>** Then the sons of Judah approached Joshua at Gilgal, and Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite said to him, “You know the word that the Lord spoke to Moses the man of God concerning me and you at Kadesh-barnea. **<sup>7</sup>** I was forty years old when Moses the servant of the Lord sent me from Kadesh-barnea to spy out the land, and I brought him back a report according to what was in my heart. **<sup>8</sup>** But my brothers who went up with me made the hearts of the people melt, whereas I followed the Lord my God fully. **<sup>9</sup>** So Moses swore on that day, saying, ‘Surely the land on which your foot has walked shall be an inheritance for you and your children forever, because you have fully followed the Lord my God.’ **<sup>10</sup>** Now behold, the Lord has kept me alive, just as He said, these forty-five years since the Lord spoke this word to Moses, while Israel wandered in the wilderness. And now, behold, I am eighty-five years old today. **<sup>11</sup>** I am still as strong today as I was on the day that Moses sent me; my strength then was as my strength is now, for war and for going out and coming in. **<sup>12</sup>** So now give me this hill country of which the Lord spoke on that day. For you heard on that day that the Anakim were there, with great fortified cities. Perhaps the Lord will be with me, and I shall drive them out just as the Lord has said.”

**<sup>13</sup>** Then Joshua blessed him and gave Hebron to Caleb son of Jephunneh as an inheritance. **<sup>14</sup>** Therefore Hebron became the inheritance of Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite to this day, because he fully followed the Lord, the God of Israel. **<sup>15</sup>** Now the name of Hebron formerly was Kiriath-arba; Arba was the greatest man among the Anakim. And the land had rest from war. 

## Chapter 15

**<sup>1</sup>** The allotment for the tribe of the sons of Judah, according to their clans, extended southward to the boundary of Edom, to the wilderness of Zin at the farthest south. **<sup>2</sup>** Their southern boundary ran from the end of the Salt Sea, from the bay that faces southward. **<sup>3</sup>** Then it proceeded southward to the ascent of Akrabbim and passed on to Zin, and went up south of Kadesh-barnea and passed on to Hezron, and went up to Addar and turned about to Karka. **<sup>4</sup>** From there it passed on to Azmon and went out by the Brook of Egypt, and the border ended at the sea. This shall be their southern boundary.

**<sup>5</sup>** The eastern boundary was the Salt Sea, as far as the mouth of the Jordan. The northern boundary began at the bay of the sea at the mouth of the Jordan. **<sup>6</sup>** It went up to Beth-hoglah and passed north of Beth-arabah; and the boundary went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben. **<sup>7</sup>** The boundary went up to Debir from the Valley of Achor, and turned northward toward Gilgal, which faces the ascent of Adummim, which is south of the valley; and the boundary continued to the waters of En-shemesh, and ended at En-rogel. **<sup>8</sup>** Then the boundary went up the Valley of Ben-Hinnom to the south slope of the Jebusite—that is, Jerusalem—and the boundary went up to the top of the mountain that lies before the Valley of Hinnom to the west, which is at the end of the Valley of Rephaim northward. **<sup>9</sup>** The boundary curved from the top of the mountain to the spring of the waters of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of Mount Ephron; then the boundary curved to Baalah (that is, Kiriath-jearim). **<sup>10</sup>** From Baalah the boundary turned westward to Mount Seir, passed along to the slope of Mount Jearim on the north (that is, Chesalon), and went down to Beth-shemesh and passed through Timnah. **<sup>11</sup>** The boundary went out to the slope of Ekron northward, and curved to Shikkeron, passed along to Mount Baalah, and went out to Jabneel. Then the boundary ended at the sea. **<sup>12</sup>** The western boundary was the Great Sea with its coastline. This was the boundary around the sons of Judah according to their clans.

**<sup>13</sup>** Now to Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a portion among the sons of Judah, according to the command of the LORD to Joshua, namely, Kiriath-arba (Arba was the father of Anak), that is, Hebron. **<sup>14</sup>** Caleb drove out from there the three sons of Anak: Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai, the descendants of Anak. **<sup>15</sup>** Then he went up from there against the inhabitants of Debir (now the name of Debir formerly was Kiriath-sepher). **<sup>16</sup>** And Caleb said, “Whoever strikes Kiriath-sepher and captures it, I will give him Achsah my daughter as a wife.” **<sup>17</sup>** And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, captured it, so he gave him Achsah his daughter as a wife. **<sup>18</sup>** When she came to him, she urged him to ask her father for a field. And she got down from her donkey, and Caleb said to her, “What do you desire?” **<sup>19</sup>** She said to him, “Give me a blessing. Since you have given me land in the Negev, give me also springs of water.” So he gave her the upper springs and the lower springs.

**<sup>20</sup>** This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Judah according to their clans. **<sup>21</sup>** The cities at the farthest south of the tribe of the sons of Judah, toward the boundary of Edom in the Negev, were Kabzeel, Eder, Jagur, **<sup>22</sup>** Kinah, Dimonah, Adadah, **<sup>23</sup>** Kedesh, Hazor, Ithnan, **<sup>24</sup>** Ziph, Telem, Bealoth, **<sup>25</sup>** Hazor-hadattah, Kerioth-hezron (that is, Hazor), **<sup>26</sup>** Amam, Shema, Moladah, **<sup>27</sup>** Hazar-gaddah, Heshmon, Beth-pelet, **<sup>28</sup>** Hazar-shual, Beersheba, Biziothiah, **<sup>29</sup>** Baalah, Iim, Ezem, **<sup>30</sup>** Eltolad, Chesil, Hormah, **<sup>31</sup>** Ziklag, Madmannah, Sansannah, **<sup>32</sup>** Lebaoth, Shilhim, Ain, and Rimmon; in all, twenty-nine cities with their villages.

**<sup>33</sup>** In the lowland: Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah, **<sup>34</sup>** Zanoah, En-gannim, Tappuah, Enam, **<sup>35</sup>** Jarmuth, Adullam, Socoh, Azekah, **<sup>36</sup>** Shaaraim, Adithaim, Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages.

**<sup>37</sup>** Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal-gad, **<sup>38</sup>** Dilean, Mizpeh, Joktheel, **<sup>39</sup>** Lachish, Bozkath, Eglon, **<sup>40</sup>** Cabbon, Lahmas, Chitlish, **<sup>41</sup>** Gederoth, Beth-dagon, Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages.

**<sup>42</sup>** Libnah, Ether, Ashan, **<sup>43</sup>** Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib, **<sup>44</sup>** Keilah, Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages.

**<sup>45</sup>** Ekron, with its towns and its villages; **<sup>46</sup>** from Ekron to the sea, all that were near Ashdod, with their villages. **<sup>47</sup>** Ashdod, its towns and its villages; Gaza, its towns and its villages, as far as the Brook of Egypt and the Great Sea with its coastline.

**<sup>48</sup>** In the hill country: Shamir, Jattir, Socoh, **<sup>49</sup>** Dannah, Kiriath-sannah (that is, Debir), **<sup>50</sup>** Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim, **<sup>51</sup>** Goshen, Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their villages.

**<sup>52</sup>** Arab, Dumah, Eshan, **<sup>53</sup>** Janim, Beth-tappuah, Aphekah, **<sup>54</sup>** Humtah, Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron), and Zior; nine cities with their villages.

**<sup>55</sup>** Maon, Carmel, Ziph, Juttah, **<sup>56</sup>** Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah, **<sup>57</sup>** Kain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages.

**<sup>58</sup>** Halhul, Beth-zur, Gedor, **<sup>59</sup>** Maarath, Beth-anoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages.

**<sup>60</sup>** Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim), and Rabbah; two cities with their villages.

**<sup>61</sup>** In the wilderness: Beth-arabah, Middin, Secacah, **<sup>62</sup>** Nibshan, the City of Salt, and En-gedi; six cities with their villages.

**<sup>63</sup>** But the sons of Judah could not drive out the Jebusites who inhabited Jerusalem; so the Jebusites dwell with the sons of Judah in Jerusalem to this day. 

## Chapter 16

**<sup>1</sup>** The allotment for the descendants of Joseph began at the Jordan near Jericho, east of the waters of Jericho, then went up through the wilderness into the hill country to Bethel. **<sup>2</sup>** It went out from Bethel to Luz, and passed along to Ataroth, the territory of the Archites. **<sup>3</sup>** Then it went down westward to the territory of the Japhletites, as far as the border of Lower Beth-horon, and on to Gezer, and ended at the sea. **<sup>4</sup>** So the descendants of Joseph—Manasseh and Ephraim—received their inheritance.

**<sup>5</sup>** The territory of the descendants of Ephraim by their clans was as follows: the boundary of their inheritance on the east was Ataroth-addar as far as Upper Beth-horon. **<sup>6</sup>** The boundary went out westward to the sea, from Michmethath on the north, then turned eastward to Taanath-shiloh, and passed beyond it to the east to Janoah. **<sup>7</sup>** Then it went down from Janoah to Ataroth and to Naarah, touched Jericho, and ended at the Jordan. **<sup>8</sup>** From Tappuah the boundary went westward to the Brook of Kanah and ended at the sea. This was the inheritance of the tribe of the descendants of Ephraim by their clans, **<sup>9</sup>** along with the cities that were set apart for the descendants of Ephraim within the inheritance of the descendants of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages. **<sup>10</sup>** But they did not drive out the Canaanites who lived in Gezer; so the Canaanites have lived within Ephraim to this day, but they became forced laborers. 

## Chapter 17

**<sup>1</sup>** The allotment for the tribe of Manasseh, for he was the firstborn of Joseph, was as follows: to Machir, the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead, were allotted Gilead and Bashan, because he was a man of war. **<sup>2</sup>** So the rest of the sons of Manasseh received their portion by their clans: the sons of Abiezer, the sons of Helek, the sons of Asriel, the sons of Shechem, the sons of Hepher, and the sons of Shemida. These were the male descendants of Manasseh son of Joseph, by their clans.

**<sup>3</sup>** Now Zelophehad, son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, had no sons, but only daughters. These are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. **<sup>4</sup>** They came before Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the leaders, and said, “The LORD commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brothers.” So, in accordance with the command of the LORD, he gave them an inheritance among the brothers of their father.

**<sup>5</sup>** Thus there fell ten portions to Manasseh, besides the land of Gilead and Bashan, which is beyond the Jordan, **<sup>6</sup>** because the daughters of Manasseh received an inheritance among his sons. And the land of Gilead was given to the rest of the sons of Manasseh.

**<sup>7</sup>** The border of Manasseh went from Asher to Michmethath, which is east of Shechem. Then the boundary went southward to the inhabitants of En-Tappuah. **<sup>8</sup>** The land of Tappuah belonged to Manasseh, but Tappuah itself, on the border of Manasseh, belonged to the sons of Ephraim. **<sup>9</sup>** Then the boundary descended to the Brook of Kanah, southward of the brook. These cities belonged to Ephraim among the cities of Manasseh. The boundary of Manasseh was on the north side of the brook, and it ended at the sea. **<sup>10</sup>** The land to the south belonged to Ephraim and that to the north to Manasseh, and the sea was its border. They met in Asher on the north and in Issachar on the east. **<sup>11</sup>** In Issachar and Asher, Manasseh had Beth-shean and its towns, Ibleam and its towns, the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, the inhabitants of Endor and its towns, the inhabitants of Taanach and its towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns—the third is Napheth.

**<sup>12</sup>** Yet the sons of Manasseh could not take possession of those cities, because the Canaanites persisted in dwelling in that land. **<sup>13</sup>** But when the sons of Israel became strong, they put the Canaanites to forced labor, but did not drive them out completely.

**<sup>14</sup>** Then the sons of Joseph spoke to Joshua and said, “Why have you given us only one lot and one portion as an inheritance, though we are a numerous people, whom the LORD has thus far blessed?” **<sup>15</sup>** And Joshua said to them, “If you are a numerous people, go up to the forest and clear ground for yourselves there in the land of the Perizzites and the Rephaim, since the hill country of Ephraim is too narrow for you.” **<sup>16</sup>** The sons of Joseph said, “The hill country is not enough for us, and all the Canaanites who dwell in the valley have iron chariots—both those in Beth-shean and its towns and those in the Valley of Jezreel.” **<sup>17</sup>** Then Joshua said to the house of Joseph, to Ephraim and Manasseh, “You are a numerous people and have great strength. You shall not have just one lot, **<sup>18</sup>** but the hill country shall be yours. Though it is forested, you shall clear it, and it shall be yours to its farthest borders. For you shall drive out the Canaanites, even though they have iron chariots and though they are strong.” 

## Chapter 18

**<sup>1</sup>** The whole congregation of the sons of Israel assembled at Shiloh, and they set up the Tent of Meeting there. The land was subdued before them. **<sup>2</sup>** Yet there remained among the sons of Israel seven tribes that had not divided their inheritance.

**<sup>3</sup>** So Joshua said to the sons of Israel, “How long will you delay going in to take possession of the land which the LORD, the God of your fathers, has given you? **<sup>4</sup>** Appoint from among you three men from each tribe, and I will send them out; they shall arise and go through the land and describe it according to their inheritance, and then return to me. **<sup>5</sup>** They shall divide it into seven portions—Judah shall remain in his territory on the south, and the house of Joseph shall remain in their territory on the north. **<sup>6</sup>** You shall describe the land in seven divisions, and bring the description here to me. Then I will cast lots for you here before the LORD our God.

**<sup>7</sup>** For the Levites have no portion among you, for the priesthood of the LORD is their inheritance. And Gad and Reuben and the half-tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance beyond the Jordan to the east, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave them.”

**<sup>8</sup>** So the men arose and went, and Joshua commanded those who went to describe the land, saying, “Go and walk through the land and describe it, and return to me. Then I will cast lots for you here before the LORD in Shiloh.” **<sup>9</sup>** And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities in seven divisions in a book; and they came to Joshua to the camp at Shiloh. **<sup>10</sup>** Then Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD, and there Joshua divided the land among the sons of Israel according to their divisions.

**<sup>11</sup>** The lot of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin came up according to their families, and the territory of their lot lay between the sons of Judah and the sons of Joseph. **<sup>12</sup>** Their border on the north side was from the Jordan, and the border went up to the slope of Jericho on the north, and went up through the hill country westward, and it ended at the wilderness of Beth-aven. **<sup>13</sup>** From there the border passed to Luz, to the southern slope of Luz (that is, Bethel). Then the border went down to Ataroth-addar, near the hill that lies south of Lower Beth-horon.

**<sup>14</sup>** The border turned and went around the west side southward from the hill that lies to the south opposite Beth-horon, and it ended at Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim), a city of the sons of Judah. This was the west side. **<sup>15</sup>** Then the south side was from the end of Kiriath-jearim, and the border went westward and came out at the spring of the waters of Nephtoah. **<sup>16</sup>** The border went down to the foot of the mountain that lies before the Valley of Ben-hinnom, which is in the valley of Rephaim northward; and it went down to the Valley of Hinnom, to the southern slope of the Jebusite city (that is, Jerusalem). And the border went down to the spring of En-rogel.

**<sup>17</sup>** Then it turned northward and went to En-shemesh and went to Geliloth, which is opposite the ascent of Adummim, and it went down to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben. **<sup>18</sup>** It passed on to the north of the slope of Beth-arabah and went down to the Arabah. **<sup>19</sup>** The border passed on to the north side of Beth-hoglah, and the border ended at the northern bay of the Salt Sea, at the south end of the Jordan. This was the southern border. **<sup>20</sup>** And the Jordan was its border on the east side. This was the inheritance of the sons of Benjamin, according to their families, by its boundaries all around.

**<sup>21</sup>** Now the cities of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin according to their families were: Jericho, Beth-hoglah, Emek-keziz, **<sup>22</sup>** Beth-arabah, Zemaraim, Bethel, **<sup>23</sup>** Avvim, Parah, Ophrah, **<sup>24</sup>** Chephar-ammoni, Ophni, and Geba; twelve cities with their villages.

**<sup>25</sup>** Gibeon, Ramah, Beeroth, **<sup>26</sup>** Mizpeh, Chephirah, Mozah, **<sup>27</sup>** Rekem, Irpeel, Taralah, **<sup>28</sup>** Zela, Haeleph, Jebus (that is, Jerusalem), Gibeah, and Kiriath; fourteen cities with their villages. This was the inheritance of the sons of Benjamin according to their families. 

## Chapter 19

**<sup>1</sup>** The second lot came out for Simeon, for the tribe of the sons of Simeon according to their clans. Their inheritance was within the inheritance of the sons of Judah. **<sup>2</sup>** They received as their inheritance: Beersheba (also known as Sheba), Moladah, **<sup>3</sup>** Hazar-shual, Balah, Ezem, **<sup>4</sup>** Eltolad, Bethul, Hormah, **<sup>5</sup>** Ziklag, Beth-marcaboth, Hazar-susah, **<sup>6</sup>** Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen—thirteen cities with their villages.

**<sup>7</sup>** Ain, Rimmon, Ether, and Ashan—four cities with their villages, **<sup>8</sup>** and all the villages that were around these cities as far as Baalath-beer, Ramah of the Negev. This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Simeon according to their clans. **<sup>9</sup>** The inheritance of the sons of Simeon was taken from the portion of the sons of Judah, because the portion of the sons of Judah was too large for them. So the sons of Simeon received an inheritance within Judah’s inheritance.

**<sup>10</sup>** The third lot came up for the sons of Zebulun according to their clans. The territory of their inheritance reached as far as Sarid. **<sup>11</sup>** Their border went up westward to Maralah, touched Dabbesheth, and reached the wadi that is opposite Jokneam. **<sup>12</sup>** It turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrise to the border of Chisloth-tabor, then went on to Daberath and up to Japhia. **<sup>13</sup>** From there it passed eastward to Gath-hepher, to Eth-kazin, and came out at Rimmon, turning toward Neah. **<sup>14</sup>** Then the border turned on the north to Hannathon, and it ended at the Valley of Iphtahel.

**<sup>15</sup>** Included were Kattath, Nahalal, Shimron, Idalah, and Bethlehem—twelve cities with their villages. **<sup>16</sup>** This was the inheritance of the sons of Zebulun according to their clans—these cities with their villages.

**<sup>17</sup>** The fourth lot came out for Issachar, for the sons of Issachar according to their clans. **<sup>18</sup>** Their territory included Jezreel, Chesulloth, Shunem, **<sup>19</sup>** Hapharaim, Shion, Anaharath, **<sup>20</sup>** Rabbith, Kishion, Ebez, **<sup>21</sup>** Remeth, En-gannim, En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez. **<sup>22</sup>** The border touched Tabor, Shahazumah, and Beth-shemesh, and its boundary ended at the Jordan—sixteen cities with their villages. **<sup>23</sup>** This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Issachar according to their clans—the cities with their villages.

**<sup>24</sup>** The fifth lot came out for the tribe of the sons of Asher according to their clans. **<sup>25</sup>** Their territory included Helkath, Hali, Beten, Achshaph, **<sup>26</sup>** Allammelech, Amad, and Mishal. On the west the border touched Carmel and Shihor-libnath. **<sup>27</sup>** Then it turned eastward to Beth-dagon, touched Zebulun and the Valley of Iphtahel northward to Beth-emek and Neiel, and it went north to Cabul. **<sup>28</sup>** Also included were Ebron, Rehob, Hammon, and Kanah, as far as Great Sidon. **<sup>29</sup>** The border turned toward Ramah and as far as the fortified city of Tyre. Then the border turned to Hosah, and it ended at the sea near the region of Achzib. **<sup>30</sup>** Also included were Ummah, Aphek, and Rehob—twenty-two cities with their villages. **<sup>31</sup>** This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Asher according to their clans—these cities with their villages.

**<sup>32</sup>** The sixth lot came out for the sons of Naphtali, for the sons of Naphtali according to their clans. **<sup>33</sup>** Their border ran from Heleph, from the oak in Zaanannim, Adami-nekeb, and Jabneel, as far as Lakkum, and it ended at the Jordan. **<sup>34</sup>** The border turned westward to Aznoth-tabor, and from there it went to Hukkok. It touched Zebulun on the south, Asher on the west, and Judah at the Jordan on the east. **<sup>35</sup>** The fortified cities were Ziddim, Zer, Hammath, Rakkath, Chinnereth, **<sup>36</sup>** Adamah, Ramah, Hazor, **<sup>37</sup>** Kedesh, Edrei, En-hazor, **<sup>38</sup>** Yiron, Migdal-el, Horem, Beth-anath, and Beth-shemesh—nineteen cities with their villages. **<sup>39</sup>** This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali according to their clans—the cities with their villages.

**<sup>40</sup>** The seventh lot came out for the tribe of the sons of Dan according to their clans. **<sup>41</sup>** The territory of their inheritance included Zorah, Eshtaol, Ir-shemesh, **<sup>42</sup>** Shaalabbin, Aijalon, Ithlah, **<sup>43</sup>** Elon, Timnah, Ekron, **<sup>44</sup>** Eltekeh, Gibbethon, Baalath, **<sup>45</sup>** Jehud, Bene-berak, Gath-rimmon, **<sup>46</sup>** and Me-jarkon and Rakkon, with the territory opposite Joppa.

**<sup>47</sup>** But the territory of the sons of Dan was too small for them, so the sons of Dan went up and fought against Leshem. After capturing it and striking it with the sword, they took possession of it, settled there, and renamed it Dan after the name of their father Dan. **<sup>48</sup>** This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Dan according to their clans—these cities with their villages.

**<sup>49</sup>** When they finished distributing the land according to its borders, the sons of Israel gave Joshua son of Nun an inheritance among them. **<sup>50</sup>** According to the word of the Lord, they gave him the city that he asked for, Timnath-serah in the hill country of Ephraim. He built up the city and settled in it.

**<sup>51</sup>** These are the inheritances that Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers’ houses of the tribes of the sons of Israel distributed by lot at Shiloh before the Lord, at the entrance of the tent of meeting. So they finished dividing the land. 

## Chapter 20

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD spoke to Joshua, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, ‘Appoint for yourselves the cities of refuge, about which I spoke to you through Moses, **<sup>3</sup>** so that the manslayer who strikes down a man unintentionally, without premeditation, may flee there, and they shall be for you a refuge from the avenger of blood. **<sup>4</sup>** And he shall flee to one of those cities and stand at the entrance of the gate of the city and state his case in the hearing of the elders of that city. Then they shall take him into the city and give him a place, so that he may dwell among them. **<sup>5</sup>** Now if the avenger of blood pursues him, then they shall not deliver the manslayer into his hand, because he struck down his fellow man without premeditation and did not hate him beforehand. **<sup>6</sup>** And he shall dwell in that city until he stands before the congregation for judgment, until the death of the high priest who is in office in those days. Then the manslayer shall return and come to his own city and to his own house, to the city from which he fled.”

**<sup>7</sup>** So they set apart Kedesh in Galilee in the hill country of Naphtali, and Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron) in the hill country of Judah. **<sup>8</sup>** Beyond the Jordan river, east of Jericho, they designated Bezer in the wilderness on the plain, from the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead from the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan from the tribe of Manasseh.

**<sup>9</sup>** These were the cities appointed for all the sons of Israel and for the sojourner who dwells among them, so that whoever struck down a man unintentionally might flee there and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood before standing before the congregation. 

## Chapter 21

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the heads of the fathers of the Levites came near to Eleazar the priest, to Joshua son of Nun, and to the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel. **<sup>2</sup>** And they spoke to them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, “The LORD commanded through Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with their pasturelands for our livestock.” **<sup>3</sup>** So the sons of Israel gave to the Levites, from their inheritance, according to the command of the LORD, these cities with their pasturelands.

**<sup>4</sup>** The lot came out for the families of the Kohathites. And the sons of Aaron the priest, who were of the Levites, received by lot thirteen cities from the tribe of Judah, from the tribe of Simeon, and from the tribe of Benjamin. **<sup>5</sup>** And the rest of the sons of Kohath received by lot ten cities from the families of the tribes of Ephraim, Dan, and the half-tribe of Manasseh. **<sup>6</sup>** And the sons of Gershon received by lot thirteen cities from the families of the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan. **<sup>7</sup>** The sons of Merari according to their families received twelve cities from the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun. **<sup>8</sup>** So the sons of Israel gave to the Levites these cities with their pasturelands, as the LORD had commanded through Moses by lot.

**<sup>9</sup>** From the tribe of the sons of Judah and from the tribe of the sons of Simeon, they gave these cities which are mentioned by name. **<sup>10</sup>** And they were for the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites, of the sons of Levi, for the lot was theirs first. **<sup>11</sup>** And they gave them Kiriath-arba (Arba being the father of Anak), that is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, with its surrounding pasturelands. **<sup>12</sup>** But the fields of the city and its villages they gave to Caleb son of Jephunneh as his possession. **<sup>13</sup>** So they gave to the sons of Aaron the priest: Hebron, the city of refuge for the manslayer, with its pasturelands; Libnah with its pasturelands; **<sup>14</sup>** Jattir with its pasturelands, Eshtemoa with its pasturelands; **<sup>15</sup>** Holon with its pasturelands, Debir with its pasturelands; **<sup>16</sup>** Ain with its pasturelands, Juttah with its pasturelands, and Beth-shemesh with its pasturelands—nine cities from these two tribes.

**<sup>17</sup>** And from the tribe of Benjamin: Gibeon with its pasturelands, Geba with its pasturelands, **<sup>18</sup>** Anathoth with its pasturelands, and Almon with its pasturelands—four cities. **<sup>19</sup>** All the cities of the sons of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen cities with their pasturelands.

**<sup>20</sup>** And the families of the sons of Kohath, the Levites who remained of the sons of Kohath, received the cities of their lot from the tribe of Ephraim. **<sup>21</sup>** They gave them Shechem, the city of refuge for the manslayer, in the hill country of Ephraim, with its pasturelands; Gezer with its pasturelands; **<sup>22</sup>** Kibzaim with its pasturelands, and Beth-horon with its pasturelands—four cities. **<sup>23</sup>** And from the tribe of Dan: Elteke with its pasturelands, Gibbethon with its pasturelands, **<sup>24</sup>** Aijalon with its pasturelands, Gath-rimmon with its pasturelands—four cities. **<sup>25</sup>** And from the half-tribe of Manasseh: Taanach with its pasturelands, and Gath-rimmon with its pasturelands—two cities. **<sup>26</sup>** All the cities with their pasturelands for the families of the remaining sons of Kohath were ten cities.

**<sup>27</sup>** And to the sons of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, from the half-tribe of Manasseh: Golan in Bashan, the city of refuge for the manslayer, with its pasturelands, and Beeshterah with its pasturelands—two cities. **<sup>28</sup>** And from the tribe of Issachar: Kishion with its pasturelands, Daberath with its pasturelands, **<sup>29</sup>** Jarmuth with its pasturelands, En-gannim with its pasturelands—four cities. **<sup>30</sup>** And from the tribe of Asher: Mishal with its pasturelands, Abdon with its pasturelands, **<sup>31</sup>** Helkath with its pasturelands, and Rehob with its pasturelands—four cities. **<sup>32</sup>** And from the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee, the city of refuge for the manslayer, with its pasturelands, Hammoth-dor with its pasturelands, and Kartan with its pasturelands—three cities. **<sup>33</sup>** All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families were thirteen cities with their pasturelands.

**<sup>34</sup>** And to the families of the sons of Merari, the rest of the Levites, from the tribe of Zebulun: Jokneam with its pasturelands, Kartah with its pasturelands, **<sup>35</sup>** Dimnah with its pasturelands, and Nahalal with its pasturelands—four cities. **<sup>36</sup>** And from the tribe of Reuben: Bezer with its pasturelands, Jahaz with its pasturelands, **<sup>37</sup>** Kedemoth with its pasturelands, and Mephaath with its pasturelands—four cities. **<sup>38</sup>** And from the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead, the city of refuge for the manslayer, with its pasturelands, Mahanaim with its pasturelands, **<sup>39</sup>** Heshbon with its pasturelands, and Jazer with its pasturelands—four cities in all. **<sup>40</sup>** All these were the cities of the sons of Merari according to their families, the rest of the families of the Levites, and their lot was twelve cities.

**<sup>41</sup>** All the cities of the Levites in the midst of the possession of the sons of Israel were forty-eight cities with their pasturelands. **<sup>42</sup>** These cities had each its surrounding pasturelands; so it was with all these cities.

**<sup>43</sup>** So the LORD gave to Israel all the land that He had sworn to give to their fathers, and they possessed it and lived in it. **<sup>44</sup>** And the LORD gave them rest on every side, according to all that He had sworn to their fathers, and none of their enemies stood before them; the LORD gave all their enemies into their hand. **<sup>45</sup>** Not one word of all the good words which the LORD had spoken to the house of Israel failed; all came to pass. 

## Chapter 22

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Joshua summoned the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, **<sup>2</sup>** and said to them, “You have kept all that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you. **<sup>3</sup>** You have not forsaken your brothers these many days, down to this day, but have been careful to keep the charge of the LORD your God. **<sup>4</sup>** And now the LORD your God has given rest to your brothers, as He promised them. So now return and go to your tents, to the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you beyond the Jordan.

**<sup>5</sup>** Only be very careful to observe the commandment and the law that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you: to love the LORD your God, to walk in all His ways, to keep His commandments, to cling to Him, and to serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul.” **<sup>6</sup>** So Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they went to their tents.

**<sup>7</sup>** Now to the half-tribe of Manasseh Moses had given possession in Bashan, but to the other half Joshua gave a portion among their brothers west of the Jordan. And when Joshua sent them away to their tents, he blessed them, **<sup>8</sup>** and said to them, “Return with great riches to your tents, and with very much livestock, with silver, gold, bronze, and iron, and with much clothing. Divide the spoil of your enemies with your brothers.”

**<sup>9</sup>** So the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh returned and departed from the sons of Israel at Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go to the land of Gilead, to the land of their possession, which they had acquired according to the commandment of the LORD through Moses.

**<sup>10</sup>** When they came to the region of the Jordan that is in the land of Canaan, the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by the Jordan, a large altar in appearance.

**<sup>11</sup>** The sons of Israel heard it said, “Behold, the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh have built an altar at the edge of the land of Canaan, in the region of the Jordan, on the side that belongs to the sons of Israel.” **<sup>12</sup>** When the sons of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the sons of Israel gathered at Shiloh to go up against them in war.

**<sup>13</sup>** Then the sons of Israel sent to the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, in the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, **<sup>14</sup>** and ten leaders with him, one leader each from a father’s household of every tribe of Israel; and each one was the head of his father’s household among the thousands of Israel.

**<sup>15</sup>** They came to the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, in the land of Gilead, and they spoke with them, saying, **<sup>16</sup>** “Thus says the whole congregation of the LORD: ‘What is this unfaithful act which you have committed against the God of Israel, by turning away today from following the LORD, by building yourselves an altar, to rebel against the LORD this day?

**<sup>17</sup>** Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we have not cleansed ourselves to this day, although there came a plague upon the congregation of the LORD, **<sup>18</sup>** that you must turn away this day from following the LORD? And it will come about that if you rebel against the LORD today, He will be angry with the whole congregation of Israel tomorrow.

**<sup>19</sup>** If, however, the land of your possession is unclean, then cross over to the land of the LORD’s possession, where the LORD’s tabernacle stands, and take possession among us. But do not rebel against the LORD, nor rebel against us, by building an altar for yourselves besides the altar of the LORD our God.

**<sup>20</sup>** Did not Achan the son of Zerah act unfaithfully in the matter of the devoted thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? And that man did not perish alone in his iniquity.’”

**<sup>21</sup>** Then the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh answered and spoke to the heads of the families of Israel, **<sup>22</sup>** “The Mighty One, God, the LORD! The Mighty One, God, the LORD! He knows, and may Israel itself know. If it was in rebellion or in unfaithfulness against the LORD, do not spare us this day.

**<sup>23</sup>** If we have built us an altar to turn away from following the LORD, or to offer burnt offering or grain offering on it, or if to offer sacrifices of peace offerings on it, may the LORD Himself require it.

**<sup>24</sup>** But truly we have done this out of concern, thinking, ‘In time to come your sons may say to our sons, “What have you to do with the LORD, the God of Israel?

**<sup>25</sup>** For the LORD has made the Jordan river a border between us and you, you sons of Reuben and sons of Gad; you have no portion in the LORD.” So your sons might cause our sons to stop fearing the LORD.’

**<sup>26</sup>** Therefore we said, ‘Let us build an altar, not for burnt offering or for sacrifice, **<sup>27</sup>** but to be a witness between us and you, and between our generations after us, that we are to perform the service of the LORD before Him with our burnt offerings, with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings, so that your sons may not say to our sons in time to come, “You have no portion in the LORD.”’

**<sup>28</sup>** Therefore we said, ‘It shall also come about if they say this to us or to our generations in time to come, then we shall say, “See the copy of the altar of the LORD which our fathers made, not for burnt offering or for sacrifice; rather, it is a witness between us and you.”’

**<sup>29</sup>** Far be it from us that we should rebel against the LORD and turn away this day from following the LORD, by building an altar for burnt offering, for grain offering, or for sacrifice, besides the altar of the LORD our God which is before His tabernacle.”

**<sup>30</sup>** When Phinehas the priest and the leaders of the congregation, even the heads of the families of Israel who were with him, heard the words which the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the sons of Manasseh spoke, it pleased them. **<sup>31</sup>** And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said to the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the sons of Manasseh, “Today we know that the LORD is among us, because you have not committed this unfaithful act against the LORD. Now you have delivered the sons of Israel from the hand of the LORD.”

**<sup>32</sup>** Then Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest and the leaders returned from the sons of Reuben and from the sons of Gad, from the land of Gilead to the land of Canaan, to the sons of Israel, and brought back word to them. **<sup>33</sup>** And the word pleased the sons of Israel, and the sons of Israel blessed God, and they did not speak of going up against them in war, to destroy the land in which the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad were living.

**<sup>34</sup>** And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad called the altar Witness; “For,” they said, “it is a witness between us that the LORD is God.” 

## Chapter 23

**<sup>1</sup>** A long time afterward, when the Lord had given rest to Israel from all their surrounding enemies, and Joshua had grown old and advanced in years, **<sup>2</sup>** Joshua summoned all Israel, its elders, its heads, its judges, and its officers, and said to them, “I am old and advanced in years. **<sup>3</sup>** You have seen all that the Lord your God did to all these nations for your sake, for the Lord your God is He who fought for you. **<sup>4</sup>** See, I have allotted to you as an inheritance, according to your tribes, these remaining nations, along with all the nations I have cut off, from the Jordan to the Great Sea in the west. **<sup>5</sup>** The Lord your God will thrust them out from before you and drive them out of your sight, and you shall take possession of their land, as the Lord your God promised you.

**<sup>6</sup>** Be very strong, then, to keep and to do all that is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, turning aside from it neither to the right hand nor to the left, **<sup>7</sup>** so that you do not mix with these nations who remain among you. Do not mention the names of their gods or swear by them, serve them, or bow down to them, **<sup>8</sup>** but hold fast to the Lord your God, as you have done to this day. **<sup>9</sup>** For the Lord has driven out great and mighty nations before you, and as for you, no man has been able to stand against you to this day. **<sup>10</sup>** One man of you puts a thousand to flight, for the Lord your God is He who fights for you, just as He promised you. **<sup>11</sup>** Therefore, be very careful to love the Lord your God.

**<sup>12</sup>** For if you ever turn back and cling to the remnant of these nations that remain among you, and intermarry with them, associating with them and they with you, **<sup>13</sup>** know for certain that the Lord your God will no longer drive out these nations before you. Instead, they shall be a snare and a trap to you, a whip on your sides and thorns in your eyes, until you perish from off this good land that the Lord your God has given you.

**<sup>14</sup>** And now, today you can see that I am going the way of all the earth, and you know in your hearts and souls that not one word has failed of all the good things that the Lord your God promised concerning you. All have come to pass for you; not one of them has failed. **<sup>15</sup>** But just as all the good things that the Lord your God promised you have come upon you, so the Lord will bring upon you all the evil things, until He has destroyed you from off this good land that the Lord your God has given you, **<sup>16</sup>** if you transgress the covenant of the Lord your God, which He commanded you, and go and serve other gods and bow down to them. Then the anger of the Lord will be kindled against you, and you shall perish quickly from off the good land that He has given to you. 

## Chapter 24

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel at Shechem. He summoned the elders of Israel, their heads, their judges, and their officers, and they presented themselves before God.

**<sup>2</sup>** Joshua said to all the people, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘Long ago your fathers lived beyond the Euphrates—Terah, the father of Abraham and Nahor—and they served other gods. **<sup>3</sup>** But I took your father Abraham from beyond the river and led him through all the land of Canaan. I multiplied his offspring and gave him Isaac. **<sup>4</sup>** And to Isaac I gave Jacob and Esau. I gave Esau the hill country of Seir to possess, but Jacob and his sons went down to Egypt.

**<sup>5</sup>** Then I sent Moses and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt with what I did in its midst, and afterward I brought you out. **<sup>6</sup>** I brought your fathers out of Egypt, and you came to the sea. And the Egyptians pursued your fathers with chariots and horsemen to the Red Sea. **<sup>7</sup>** But when they cried out to the LORD, He put darkness between you and the Egyptians and brought the sea upon them and covered them. Your eyes saw what I did in Egypt. Then you lived in the wilderness for a long time.

**<sup>8</sup>** I brought you to the land of the Amorites who lived beyond the Jordan, and they fought against you. But I gave them into your hand, and you took possession of their land when I destroyed them before you. **<sup>9</sup>** Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and fought against Israel, and he sent and summoned Balaam the son of Beor to curse you, **<sup>10</sup>** but I would not listen to Balaam. Instead, he blessed you, and I delivered you out of his hand.

**<sup>11</sup>** You crossed the Jordan and came to Jericho. The men of Jericho fought against you, along with the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Girgashite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, and I gave them into your hand. **<sup>12</sup>** I sent the hornet before you, and it drove them out before you, the two kings of the Amorites. It was not by your sword or by your bow. **<sup>13</sup>** I gave you a land on which you had not labored and cities that you had not built, and you live in them. You eat from vineyards and olive groves that you did not plant.

**<sup>14</sup>** Now, therefore, fear the LORD and serve Him in sincerity and truth. Put away the gods that your fathers served beyond the river and in Egypt, and serve the LORD. **<sup>15</sup>** But if it seems evil in your eyes to serve the LORD, then choose this day whom you will serve—whether the gods your fathers served beyond the river, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land you are living. But as for me and my house, we will serve the LORD.”

**<sup>16</sup>** Then the people answered, “Far be it from us that we should forsake the LORD to serve other gods. **<sup>17</sup>** For it is the LORD our God who brought us and our fathers up from the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, and who performed those great signs in our sight and preserved us all along the way that we went and among all the peoples through whom we passed. **<sup>18</sup>** And the LORD drove out before us all the peoples, even the Amorites who lived in the land. Therefore we also will serve the LORD, for He is our God.”

**<sup>19</sup>** But Joshua said to the people, “You are not able to serve the LORD, for He is a holy God. He is a jealous God. He will not forgive your transgressions or your sins. **<sup>20</sup>** If you forsake the LORD and serve foreign gods, then He will turn and do you harm and consume you, after having done you good.” **<sup>21</sup>** But the people said to Joshua, “No, but we will serve the LORD.” **<sup>22</sup>** Then Joshua said to the people, “You are witnesses against yourselves that you have chosen the LORD to serve Him.” And they said, “We are witnesses.” **<sup>23</sup>** “Now then,” he said, “put away the foreign gods that are among you and incline your hearts to the LORD, the God of Israel.” **<sup>24</sup>** And the people said to Joshua, “The LORD our God we will serve, and His voice we will obey.”

**<sup>25</sup>** So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day and set for them a statute and a rule at Shechem. **<sup>26</sup>** And Joshua wrote these words in the Book of the Law of God. He took a large stone and set it up there under the oak that was near the sanctuary of the LORD. **<sup>27</sup>** And Joshua said to all the people, “Behold, this stone will be a witness against us, for it has heard all the words of the LORD that He spoke to us. It shall be a witness against you, lest you deny your God.” **<sup>28</sup>** Then Joshua sent the people away, each to his inheritance.

**<sup>29</sup>** After these things, Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died at 110 years of age. **<sup>30</sup>** They buried him in his own inheritance at Timnath-serah, which is in the hill country of Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash.

**<sup>31</sup>** Israel served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua and had known all the work that the LORD had done for Israel.

**<sup>32</sup>** The bones of Joseph, which the sons of Israel brought up from Egypt, were buried at Shechem, in the portion of land that Jacob bought from the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for a hundred pieces of silver. It became an inheritance for the descendants of Joseph.

**<sup>33</sup>** And Eleazar the son of Aaron died, and they buried him at Gibeah, the town of his son Phinehas, which had been given to him in the hill country of Ephraim. 