# The First Book of Samuel

## Chapter 1

**<sup>1</sup>** There was a certain man from Ramathaim Zophim, from the hill country of Ephraim, whose name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite. **<sup>2</sup>** He had two wives. The name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah. Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.

**<sup>3</sup>** Now this man used to go up from his town year by year to worship and to sacrifice to the Lord of hosts at Shiloh, where the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were priests to the Lord. **<sup>4</sup>** On the day when Elkanah sacrificed, he would give portions to Peninnah his wife and to all her sons and daughters. **<sup>5</sup>** But to Hannah he would give a double portion, for he loved Hannah, though the Lord had closed her womb. **<sup>6</sup>** Her rival used to provoke her bitterly to irritate her, because the Lord had closed her womb. **<sup>7</sup>** So it was, year after year; as often as she went up to the house of the Lord, she was provoked. Therefore she wept and would not eat.

**<sup>8</sup>** Then Elkanah her husband said to her, “Hannah, why are you weeping? Why do you not eat? Why is your heart sad? Am I not better to you than ten sons?”

**<sup>9</sup>** After they had eaten and drunk in Shiloh, Hannah rose. Now Eli the priest was sitting on the seat by the doorpost of the temple of the Lord. **<sup>10</sup>** She was deeply distressed and prayed to the Lord, weeping bitterly. **<sup>11</sup>** She made a vow and said, “O Lord of hosts, if you will indeed look upon the affliction of your servant and remember me and not forget your servant, but will give to your servant a male child, then I will give him to the Lord all the days of his life, and no razor shall touch his head.”

**<sup>12</sup>** As she continued praying before the Lord, Eli was watching her mouth. **<sup>13</sup>** Hannah was speaking in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard. So Eli thought she was drunk. **<sup>14</sup>** Eli said to her, “How long will you go on being drunk? Put away your wine from you!”

**<sup>15</sup>** But Hannah answered and said, “No, my lord, I am a woman of troubled spirit. I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but I have been pouring out my soul before the Lord. **<sup>16</sup>** Do not regard your servant as a worthless woman, for all along I have been speaking out of my great anxiety and distress.”

**<sup>17</sup>** Then Eli answered, “Go in peace, and may the God of Israel grant your request that you have made to him.” **<sup>18</sup>** She said, “Let your servant find favor in your sight.” Then the woman went her way and ate, and her face was no longer downcast.

**<sup>19</sup>** They rose early in the morning and worshiped before the Lord. Then they returned and came to their house at Ramah. And Elkanah knew Hannah his wife, and the Lord remembered her. **<sup>20</sup>** And in due time, Hannah conceived and bore a son. She called his name Samuel, for she said, “I have asked him from the Lord.”

**<sup>21</sup>** The man Elkanah and all his house went up to offer to the Lord the yearly sacrifice and to pay his vow, **<sup>22</sup>** but Hannah did not go up. For she said to her husband, “Not until the boy is weaned; then I will bring him, so that he may appear before the Lord and dwell there forever.” **<sup>23</sup>** Elkanah her husband said to her, “Do what seems good to you; wait until you have weaned him. Only may the Lord confirm his word.” So the woman remained and nursed her son until she had weaned him.

**<sup>24</sup>** When she had weaned him, she took him up with her, along with a three-year-old bull, an ephah of flour, and a skin of wine. She brought him to the house of the Lord at Shiloh, though the child was young. **<sup>25</sup>** Then they slaughtered the bull, and brought the boy to Eli. **<sup>26</sup>** She said, “Oh, my lord! As your soul lives, my lord, I am the woman who stood here beside you, praying to the Lord. **<sup>27</sup>** For this child I prayed, and the Lord has granted me my request that I made to him. **<sup>28</sup>** Therefore I also have lent him to the Lord. As long as he lives, he is lent to the Lord.” And he worshiped the Lord there. 

## Chapter 2

**<sup>1</sup>** And Hannah prayed and said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“My heart exults in the LORD;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;my horn is lifted high in the LORD.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My mouth boasts over my enemies,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for I rejoice in Your salvation.<br/>
**<sup>2</sup>** There is none holy like the LORD;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;indeed, there is no one besides You,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;nor is there any rock like our God.<br/>
**<sup>3</sup>** Do not speak so very proudly;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;let arrogance not come from your mouth,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for the LORD is a God of knowledge,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and by Him deeds are weighed.<br/>
**<sup>4</sup>** The bows of the mighty are broken,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but those who stumbled gird themselves with strength.<br/>
**<sup>5</sup>** Those who were full have hired themselves out for bread,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but the hungry have ceased to hunger.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Even the barren has borne seven,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but she who had many children languishes.<br/>
**<sup>6</sup>** The LORD kills and brings to life;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He brings down to the grave and raises up.<br/>
**<sup>7</sup>** The LORD makes poor and makes rich;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He brings low and He lifts up.<br/>
**<sup>8</sup>** He raises the poor from the dust;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He lifts the needy from the ash heap,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to seat them with nobles<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and inherit a seat of honor.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For the pillars of the earth are the LORD's,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and He has set the world upon them.<br/>
**<sup>9</sup>** He guards the feet of His faithful ones,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but the wicked are silenced in darkness;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for not by strength shall a man prevail.<br/>
**<sup>10</sup>** The adversaries of the LORD shall be shattered;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;against them He will thunder in the heavens.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The LORD will judge the ends of the earth;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He will give strength to His king<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and exalt the horn of His anointed.”

**<sup>11</sup>** Then Elkanah went to Ramah to his house, but the boy ministered to the LORD before Eli the priest.

**<sup>12</sup>** Now the sons of Eli were worthless men; they did not know the LORD. **<sup>13</sup>** And the custom of the priests with the people was this: When any man offered a sacrifice, the priest's servant would come while the meat was boiling, with a three-pronged fork in his hand. **<sup>14</sup>** Then he would thrust it into the pan or kettle or caldron or pot; whatever the fork brought up the priest would take for himself. Thus they did in Shiloh to all the Israelites who came there.

**<sup>15</sup>** Moreover, before the fat was burned, the priest’s servant would come and say to the man who was sacrificing, “Give meat to the priest to roast, for he will not accept boiled meat from you, but only raw.”

**<sup>16</sup>** And if the man said to him, “Let them surely burn the fat first, and then take as much as you wish,” he would say, “No, but you must give it now; and if not, I will take it by force.” **<sup>17</sup>** Thus the sin of the young men was very great before the LORD, for the men treated the offering of the LORD with contempt.

**<sup>18</sup>** Now Samuel was ministering before the LORD, a boy clothed with a linen ephod. **<sup>19</sup>** And his mother would make for him a little robe and bring it to him each year when she went up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.

**<sup>20</sup>** Then Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife, and say, “May the LORD give you offspring from this woman in place of the one she dedicated to the LORD.” Then they would return to their home. **<sup>21</sup>** And the LORD visited Hannah, and she conceived and bore three sons and two daughters. And the boy Samuel grew in the presence of the LORD.

**<sup>22</sup>** Now Eli was very old, and he heard all that his sons were doing to all Israel, and how they lay with the women who served at the entrance to the tent of meeting. **<sup>23</sup>** And he said to them, “Why do you do such things? For I hear of your evil dealings from all these people. **<sup>24</sup>** No, my sons, it is not a good report that I hear the LORD’s people spreading abroad. **<sup>25</sup>** If a man sins against another, God will mediate for him; but if a man sins against the LORD, who can intercede for him?” But they would not listen to the voice of their father, for it was the LORD’s will to put them to death.

**<sup>26</sup>** Now the boy Samuel continued to grow both in stature and in favor with the LORD and also with man.

**<sup>27</sup>** And there came a man of God to Eli and said to him, “Thus says the LORD: Did I not plainly reveal Myself to the house of your father when they were in Egypt, subject to Pharaoh’s house? **<sup>28</sup>** And did I not choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be My priest, to go up to My altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before Me? And did I not give to the house of your father all the offerings by fire from the people of Israel? **<sup>29</sup>** Why then do you scorn My sacrifices and My offerings that I commanded for My dwelling, and honor your sons above Me by fattening yourselves on the choicest parts of every offering of My people Israel?”

**<sup>30</sup>** “Therefore the LORD, the God of Israel, declares: I said indeed that your house and the house of your father would walk before Me forever. But now,” declares the LORD, “far be it from Me! For those who honor Me I will honor, and those who despise Me shall be treated with contempt. **<sup>31</sup>** Behold, the days are coming when I will cut off your strength and the strength of your father’s house,so that there will not be an old man in your house. **<sup>32</sup>** Then you will look with distress at all the prosperity that shall be bestowed upon Israel, and there shall not be an old man in your house forever. **<sup>33</sup>** Yet I will not cut off every man of yours from My altar, that My eyes may fail and My soul grieve, but all the descendants of your house shall die by the sword of men. **<sup>34</sup>** And this that shall come upon your two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, shall be the sign to you: both of them shall die on the same day. **<sup>35</sup>** And I will raise up for Myself a faithful priest, who shall do according to what is in My heart and in My mind. And I will build him a sure house, and he shall walk before My anointed forever. **<sup>36</sup>** And everyone who is left in your house shall come and bow down to him for a piece of silver or a loaf of bread and shall say, ‘Please give me one of the priest’s assignments, that I may eat a morsel of bread.’” 

## Chapter 3

**<sup>1</sup>** Now the boy Samuel was ministering to the LORD before Eli. And the word of the LORD was rare in those days; prophecies were not frequent. **<sup>2</sup>** And it happened at that time that Eli was lying down in his place—his eyes had begun to grow dim, so that he could not see— **<sup>3</sup>** and the lamp of God had not yet gone out, and Samuel was lying down in the temple of the LORD, where the ark of God was.

**<sup>4</sup>** Then the LORD called Samuel, and he said, “Here I am.” **<sup>5</sup>** And he ran to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said, “I did not call; go lie down again.” So he went and lay down.

**<sup>6</sup>** And the LORD called again, “Samuel.” And Samuel arose and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” And he said, “I did not call, my son; lie down again.” **<sup>7</sup>** Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, and the word of the LORD had not yet been revealed to him.

**<sup>8</sup>** And the LORD called Samuel again a third time. And he arose and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” Then Eli perceived that the LORD was calling the boy. **<sup>9</sup>** So Eli said to Samuel, “Go lie down, and if He calls you, you shall say, ‘Speak, LORD, for Your servant is listening.’” So Samuel went and lay down in his place.

**<sup>10</sup>** Then the LORD came and stood, calling as at the other times, “Samuel! Samuel!” And Samuel said, “Speak, for Your servant is listening.” **<sup>11</sup>** Then the LORD said to Samuel, “Behold, I am about to do a thing in Israel at which both ears of everyone who hears it will tingle. **<sup>12</sup>** On that day I will fulfill against Eli all that I have spoken concerning his house, from beginning to end. **<sup>13</sup>** And I have told him that I am about to judge his house forever for the iniquity that he knew, because his sons were bringing a curse upon themselves, and he did not restrain them. **<sup>14</sup>** Therefore I swore to the house of Eli that the iniquity of Eli’s house shall not be atoned for by sacrifice or offering forever.”

**<sup>15</sup>** And Samuel lay until morning; then he opened the doors of the house of the LORD. But Samuel was afraid to tell the vision to Eli.

**<sup>16</sup>** Then Eli called Samuel and said, “Samuel, my son.” And he said, “Here I am.” **<sup>17</sup>** And he said, “What is the thing that He spoke to you? Do not hide it from me. May God do so to you and more also if you hide anything from me of all that He spoke to you.” **<sup>18</sup>** So Samuel told him everything and hid nothing from him. And he said, “It is the LORD. Let Him do what seems good to Him.”

**<sup>19</sup>** And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him and let none of his words fall to the ground. **<sup>20</sup>** And all Israel from Dan to Beersheba knew that Samuel was established as a prophet of the LORD. **<sup>21</sup>** And the LORD continued to appear in Shiloh, for the LORD revealed Himself to Samuel at Shiloh by the word of the LORD. 

## Chapter 4

**<sup>1</sup>** Now the word of Samuel came to all Israel. And Israel went out to meet the Philistines in battle, and they camped beside Ebenezer, while the Philistines camped at Aphek. **<sup>2</sup>** The Philistines drew up in line to meet Israel, and when the battle spread out, Israel was defeated before the Philistines, who struck down about four thousand men in the field of battle. **<sup>3</sup>** When the army came back to the camp, the elders of Israel said, “Why has the LORD defeated us today before the Philistines? Let us bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD from Shiloh, so that it may come among us and save us from the hand of our enemies.”

**<sup>4</sup>** So the people sent to Shiloh, and they brought from there the ark of the covenant of the LORD of hosts, who is enthroned above the cherubim. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.

**<sup>5</sup>** Now when the ark of the covenant of the LORD entered the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth resounded. **<sup>6</sup>** When the Philistines heard the noise of the shouting, they said, “What does this great shouting in the camp of the Hebrews mean?” Then they learned that the ark of the LORD had come into the camp. **<sup>7</sup>** And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, “God has come into the camp.” And they said, “Woe to us! For nothing like this has happened before. **<sup>8</sup>** Woe to us! Who can deliver us from the hand of these mighty gods? These are the gods who struck the Egyptians with every kind of plague in the wilderness. **<sup>9</sup>** Take courage and be men, O Philistines, lest you become slaves to the Hebrews as they were to you; be men and fight.”

**<sup>10</sup>** So the Philistines fought, and Israel was defeated, and every man fled to his tent. And the slaughter was very great, and there fell of Israel thirty thousand foot soldiers. **<sup>11</sup>** And the ark of God was captured, and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, died. **<sup>12</sup>** And a man of Benjamin ran from the battle line and came to Shiloh that same day with his clothes torn and dirt on his head. **<sup>13</sup>** And when he arrived, Eli was sitting on his seat by the road watching, for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city and brought news, the whole city cried out.

**<sup>14</sup>** When Eli heard the sound of the outcry, he said, “What is the noise of this tumult?” Then the man hurried and told Eli. **<sup>15</sup>** Now Eli was ninety-eight years old, and his eyes were set, and he could not see. **<sup>16</sup>** And the man said to Eli, “I am the one who has come from the battle; I fled from the battle line today.” And he said, “How did things go, my son?” **<sup>17</sup>** And the messenger answered and said, “Israel has fled before the Philistines, and there has also been a great slaughter among the people. And your two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God has been captured.” **<sup>18</sup>** And when he mentioned the ark of God, Eli fell backward from his seat by the side of the gate, and his neck was broken and he died, for he was old and obese. And he had judged Israel for forty years.

**<sup>19</sup>** Now his daughter-in-law, the wife of Phinehas, was pregnant, about to give birth. And when she heard the report that the ark of God was captured and that her father-in-law and her husband were dead, she bowed down and gave birth, for her pains came upon her. **<sup>20</sup>** And at the time of her death, the women standing by her said, “Do not be afraid, for you have borne a son.” But she did not answer or pay attention. **<sup>21</sup>** And she named the boy Ichabod, saying, “The glory has departed from Israel!” because the ark of God was captured and because of her father-in-law and her husband. **<sup>22</sup>** And she said, “The glory has departed from Israel, for the ark of God has been captured.” 

## Chapter 5

**<sup>1</sup>** And the Philistines took the ark of God and brought it from Ebenezer to Ashdod. **<sup>2</sup>** Then the Philistines took the ark of God and brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it beside Dagon. **<sup>3</sup>** When the men of Ashdod rose early the next day, behold, Dagon had fallen face downward on the ground before the ark of the LORD. So they took Dagon and set him back in his place. **<sup>4</sup>** But when they rose early the next morning, behold, Dagon had fallen face downward on the ground before the ark of the LORD, and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the threshold; only the trunk of Dagon was left to him. **<sup>5</sup>** Therefore the priests of Dagon and all who enter the house of Dagon do not tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod to this day.

**<sup>6</sup>** And the hand of the LORD was heavy against the men of Ashdod, and He devastated them and struck them with tumors, both Ashdod and its territory. **<sup>7</sup>** When the men of Ashdod saw what was happening, they said, “The ark of the God of Israel must not remain with us, for His hand is hard against us and against Dagon our god.” **<sup>8</sup>** So they sent and gathered all the lords of the Philistines to them, and said, “What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel?” They said, “Let the ark of the God of Israel be brought around to Gath.” So they brought the ark of the God of Israel there.

**<sup>9</sup>** But after they brought it around, the hand of the LORD was against the city with very great confusion, and He struck the men of the city, both young and old, so that tumors broke out on them. **<sup>10</sup>** So they sent the ark of God to Ekron. But when the ark of God came to Ekron, the Ekronites cried out, saying, “They have brought around the ark of the God of Israel to kill us and our people.”

**<sup>11</sup>** So they sent and gathered all the lords of the Philistines, and said, “Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it return to its own place, so that it does not kill us and our people.” For there was a deathly panic throughout the whole city; the hand of God was very heavy there. **<sup>12</sup>** And the men who did not die were struck with tumors, and the cry of the city went up to heaven. 

## Chapter 6

**<sup>1</sup>** The ark of the LORD was in the territory of the Philistines for seven months. **<sup>2</sup>** And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying, “What shall we do with the ark of the LORD? Tell us how we should send it back to its place.”

**<sup>3</sup>** They said, “If you send away the ark of the God of Israel, do not send it empty, but by all means return to Him a guilt offering. Then you will be healed, and it will be made known to you why His hand has not turned away from you.”

**<sup>4</sup>** And they said, “What is the guilt offering that we shall return to Him?”<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They said, “Five golden tumors and five golden mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines, for the same plague was on all of you and on your lords.<br/>
**<sup>5</sup>** So you shall make images of your tumors and images of your mice that are ruining the land, and give glory to the God of Israel. Perhaps He will lighten His hand from upon you, and your gods, and your land. **<sup>6</sup>** Why should you harden your hearts as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? After He had dealt severely with them, did they not send them away, and they went? **<sup>7</sup>** So now, take and prepare one new cart and two milk cows on which there has never been a yoke. Hitch the cows to the cart, but take their calves home away from them. **<sup>8</sup>** Then take the ark of the LORD and place it on the cart. Put the golden objects that you are returning to Him as a guilt offering in a box beside it, and send it off, and let it go. **<sup>9</sup>** Watch: if it goes up by the way of its own land to Beth-shemesh, then He has done us this great harm. But if not, then we will know that it was not His hand that struck us; it happened to us by chance.”

**<sup>10</sup>** And the men did so. They took two milk cows and hitched them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home. **<sup>11</sup>** And they placed the ark of the LORD on the cart, along with the box and the golden mice and the images of their tumors. **<sup>12</sup>** And the cows went straight in the direction of Beth-shemesh, along one highway, lowing as they went. They did not turn aside to the right or to the left. And the lords of the Philistines went after them as far as the border of Beth-shemesh.

**<sup>13</sup>** Now the men of Beth-shemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley. And they lifted up their eyes and saw the ark, and they rejoiced to see it. **<sup>14</sup>** The cart came into the field of Joshua of Beth-shemesh and stopped there. There was a great stone. They split up the wood of the cart and offered the cows as a burnt offering to the LORD. **<sup>15</sup>** And the Levites took down the ark of the LORD and the box that was with it, in which were the golden objects, and they set them upon the great stone. And the men of Beth-shemesh offered burnt offerings and made sacrifices on that day to the LORD. **<sup>16</sup>** And when the five lords of the Philistines saw it, they returned that same day to Ekron.

**<sup>17</sup>** These are the golden tumors that the Philistines returned as a guilt offering to the LORD: one for Ashdod, one for Gaza, one for Ashkelon, one for Gath, one for Ekron. **<sup>18</sup>** And the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both fortified cities and unwalled villages. The great stone on which they set the ark of the LORD is a witness to this day in the field of Joshua of Beth-shemesh.

**<sup>19</sup>** And He struck down some of the men of Beth-shemesh, because they looked upon the ark of the LORD. He struck down seventy men, and the people mourned because the LORD had struck the people with a great blow. **<sup>20</sup>** And the men of Beth-shemesh said, “Who is able to stand before the LORD, this holy God? And to whom shall He go up away from us?” **<sup>21</sup>** So they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kiriath-jearim, saying, “The Philistines have returned the ark of the LORD. Come down and take it up to you.” 

## Chapter 7

**<sup>1</sup>** And the men of Kiriath-jearim came and took up the ark of the LORD. They brought it to the house of Abinadab on the hill and consecrated Eleazar, his son, to guard the ark of the LORD. **<sup>2</sup>** And from the day the ark stayed in Kiriath-jearim, a long time passed—twenty years—and all the house of Israel lamented after the LORD.

**<sup>3</sup>** And Samuel said to all the house of Israel, “If with all your heart you are returning to the LORD, then put away the foreign gods and the Ashtaroth from among you and direct your heart to the LORD and serve Him only, and He will deliver you from the hand of the Philistines.” **<sup>4</sup>** Then the sons of Israel put away the Baals and the Ashtaroth and served the LORD only. **<sup>5</sup>** And Samuel said, “Gather all Israel at Mizpah, and I will pray to the LORD for you.” **<sup>6</sup>** So they gathered at Mizpah, and drew water and poured it out before the LORD, and they fasted on that day and said there, “We have sinned against the LORD.” And Samuel judged the sons of Israel at Mizpah.

**<sup>7</sup>** When the Philistines heard that the sons of Israel had gathered at Mizpah, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. When the sons of Israel heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines. **<sup>8</sup>** And the sons of Israel said to Samuel, “Do not stop crying out to the LORD our God for us, that He may save us from the hand of the Philistines.”

**<sup>9</sup>** And Samuel took a suckling lamb and offered it as a whole burnt offering to the LORD. And Samuel cried out to the LORD for Israel, and the LORD answered him. **<sup>10</sup>** As Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel. But the LORD thundered with a great voice on that day against the Philistines and threw them into confusion, and they were routed before Israel. **<sup>11</sup>** And the men of Israel went out from Mizpah and pursued the Philistines and struck them down as far as below Beth-car. **<sup>12</sup>** Then Samuel took a stone and set it between Mizpah and Shen and called its name Ebenezer, and he said, “Thus far the LORD has helped us.” **<sup>13</sup>** So the Philistines were subdued and did not again come into the territory of Israel. And the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel. **<sup>14</sup>** And the cities that the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron to Gath, and Israel delivered their territory from the hand of the Philistines. And there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.

**<sup>15</sup>** And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life. **<sup>16</sup>** And each year he went on a circuit to Bethel and Gilgal and Mizpah, and he judged Israel in all these places. **<sup>17</sup>** Then he would return to Ramah, for his house was there, and there he also judged Israel. And he built there an altar to the LORD. 

## Chapter 8

**<sup>1</sup>** When Samuel grew old, he appointed his sons as judges over Israel. **<sup>2</sup>** The name of his firstborn son was Joel, and the name of his second was Abijah; they were judges in Beersheba. **<sup>3</sup>** But his sons did not walk in his ways; they turned aside after gain, took bribes, and perverted justice.

**<sup>4</sup>** Then all the elders of Israel gathered together and came to Samuel at Ramah. **<sup>5</sup>** And they said to him, “Behold, you are old, and your sons do not walk in your ways. Now appoint for us a king to judge us like all the nations.”

**<sup>6</sup>** But the thing was displeasing in Samuel’s eyes when they said, “Give us a king to judge us.” And Samuel prayed to the LORD. **<sup>7</sup>** And the LORD said to Samuel, “Listen to the voice of the people in all that they say to you, for it is not you they have rejected. Instead, it is Me that they have rejected from reigning over them. **<sup>8</sup>** Just as they have done to Me from the day I brought them up out of Egypt to this day—forsaking Me and serving other gods—so they are doing also to you. **<sup>9</sup>** Now then, listen to their voice. But you must solemnly warn them and declare to them the practice of the king who will reign over them.”

**<sup>10</sup>** So Samuel told all the words of the LORD to the people who were asking him for a king. **<sup>11</sup>** And he said, “This will be the practice of the king who will reign over you: He will take your sons and appoint them for himself in his chariots and among his horsemen, and they will run before his chariots. **<sup>12</sup>** He will appoint for himself commanders of thousands and commanders of fifties, and some to plow his ground and to reap his harvest, and to make his implements of war and the equipment for his chariots. **<sup>13</sup>** He will take your daughters to be perfumers and cooks and bakers. **<sup>14</sup>** He will take the best of your fields and vineyards and olive groves and give them to his servants. **<sup>15</sup>** He will take a tenth of your grain and of your vineyards and give it to his officers and to his servants. **<sup>16</sup>** He will take your male servants and your female servants, and your best young men, and your donkeys, and put them to do his work. **<sup>17</sup>** He will take a tenth of your flocks, and you yourselves will become his servants. **<sup>18</sup>** And in that day you will cry out because of your king whom you have chosen for yourselves, but the LORD will not answer you on that day.”

**<sup>19</sup>** But the people refused to listen to the voice of Samuel. And they said, “No! But there shall be a king over us, **<sup>20</sup>** so that we also may be like all the nations, and that our king may judge us and go out before us and fight our battles.”

**<sup>21</sup>** When Samuel heard all the words of the people, he repeated them in the ears of the LORD. **<sup>22</sup>** And the LORD said to Samuel, “Listen to their voice and appoint a king for them.” Then Samuel said to the men of Israel, “Each of you go to his city.” 

## Chapter 9

**<sup>1</sup>** Now there was a man of Benjamin whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, son of Zeror, son of Becorath, son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, a man of standing. **<sup>2</sup>** And he had a son whose name was Saul, a choice and handsome man, and there was no one among the sons of Israel more handsome than he. From his shoulders and upward he was taller than any of the people.

**<sup>3</sup>** Now the donkeys of Kish, Saul’s father, were lost. So Kish said to Saul his son, “Take one of the young men with you, and arise, go and look for the donkeys.” **<sup>4</sup>** And he passed through the hill country of Ephraim and passed through the land of Shalishah, but they did not find them. Then they passed through the land of Shaalim, but they were not there. And he passed through the land of Benjamin, but they did not find them. **<sup>5</sup>** When they came to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant who was with him, “Come, let us return, lest my father stop thinking about the donkeys and become anxious about us.”

**<sup>6</sup>** But he said to him, “Behold now, there is a man of God in this city, and the man is held in honor; all that he says surely comes to pass. Let us go there now; perhaps he can tell us the way our journey should take.”

**<sup>7</sup>** Then Saul said to his servant, “But if we go, what shall we bring the man? For the bread in our packs is gone, and there is no present to bring to the man of God. What do we have?”

**<sup>8</sup>** And the servant answered Saul again and said, “See here, I have in hand a quarter-shekel of silver. I will give it to the man of God, and he will tell us our way.”

**<sup>9</sup>** (Formerly in Israel, when a man went to inquire of God, he would say thus: “Come, let us go to the seer,” for the prophet of today was formerly called a seer.)

**<sup>10</sup>** Then Saul said to his servant, “Well said; come, let us go.” So they went to the city where the man of God was. **<sup>11</sup>** As they were going up the ascent to the city, they met young women coming out to draw water and said to them, “Is the seer here?”

**<sup>12</sup>** And they answered them and said, “He is; behold, he is ahead of you. Hurry now, for today he has come to the city, because the people have a sacrifice today on the high place. **<sup>13</sup>** As soon as you enter the city, you will find him before he goes up to the high place to eat, for the people will not eat until he comes, because he blesses the sacrifice. Afterward those who are invited will eat. Now go up, for you will find him at once.” **<sup>14</sup>** So they went up to the city. As they were coming into the city, behold, Samuel was coming out toward them to go up to the high place.

**<sup>15</sup>** Now the LORD had revealed to Samuel a day before Saul came, saying, **<sup>16</sup>** “At about this time tomorrow I will send to you a man from the land of Benjamin, and you shall anoint him prince over My people Israel. He shall save My people from the hand of the Philistines. For I have seen My people, because their cry has come to Me.”

**<sup>17</sup>** When Samuel saw Saul, the LORD told him, “Look! The man of whom I spoke to you! This one shall rule over My people.”

**<sup>18</sup>** Then Saul approached Samuel in the gate and said, “Please tell me where the seer’s house is.”

**<sup>19</sup>** And Samuel answered Saul and said, “I am the seer. Go up before me to the high place, for today you shall eat with me. And in the morning I will send you away and will tell you all that is in your heart. **<sup>20</sup>** And as for your donkeys that were lost three days ago, do not set your mind on them, for they have been found. And for whom is all that is desirable in Israel? Is it not for you and for all your father’s house?”

**<sup>21</sup>** And Saul answered and said, “Am I not a Benjamite, from the least of the tribes of Israel? And is not my clan the least of all the clans of the tribe of Benjamin? Why then have you spoken to me in this way?”

**<sup>22</sup>** Then Samuel took Saul and his servant and brought them into the hall and gave them a place at the head of those who had been invited—about thirty men. **<sup>23</sup>** And Samuel said to the cook, “Bring the portion that I gave you, of which I said to you, ‘Set it aside.’” **<sup>24</sup>** So the cook took up the thigh and what was on it and set it before Saul. And Samuel said, “Behold, what has been reserved is set before you. Eat, because it has been kept for you until the appointed time, when I said, ‘I have invited the people.’” So Saul ate with Samuel that day. **<sup>25</sup>** And when they came down from the high place into the city, he spoke with Saul on the roof.

**<sup>26</sup>** And they rose early. Then at the break of dawn, Samuel called to Saul on the roof, saying, “Rise, that I may send you off.” So Saul arose, and both he and Samuel went out into the street. **<sup>27</sup>** As they were going down to the outskirts of the city, Samuel said to Saul, “Tell the servant to go on ahead of us”—and he passed on—“but you, stand still now, that I may let you hear the word of God.” 

## Chapter 10

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Samuel took the flask of oil and poured it on his head, and kissed him and said, “Has not the LORD anointed you to be ruler over His inheritance? **<sup>2</sup>** When you depart from me today, you will find two men near Rachel’s tomb in the territory of Benjamin at Zelzah, and they will say to you, ‘The donkeys which you went to seek have been found, and behold, your father has stopped worrying about the donkeys and is anxious for you, saying, “What shall I do about my son?”’

**<sup>3</sup>** Then you shall go on from there further and come to the oak of Tabor, and three men going up to God at Bethel will meet you there, one carrying three young goats, another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a skin of wine. **<sup>4</sup>** And they will greet you and give you two loaves of bread, which you shall accept from their hand. **<sup>5</sup>** After that you shall come to Gibeath-haelohim, where the Philistine garrison is; and it shall be, when you come to the city, you will meet a group of prophets coming down from the high place with harp, tambourine, flute, and lyre before them, and they will be prophesying. **<sup>6</sup>** Then the Spirit of the LORD will rush upon you, and you will prophesy with them and be changed into another man. **<sup>7</sup>** And when these signs come to you, do whatever your hand finds to do, for God is with you. **<sup>8</sup>** Then you shall go down before me to Gilgal; and behold, I will come down to you to offer burnt offerings and to sacrifice peace offerings. Seven days you shall wait, until I come to you and show you what you shall do.

**<sup>9</sup>** Then it happened that when he turned his back to leave Samuel, God gave him another heart; and all those signs came to pass that day. **<sup>10</sup>** When they came there to Gibeah, behold, a group of prophets met him, and the Spirit of God rushed upon him, and he prophesied among them.

**<sup>11</sup>** Now all who had known him previously saw that he prophesied with the prophets, and the people said to one another, “What has happened to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?” **<sup>12</sup>** Then a man from there answered and said, “And who is their father?” Therefore it became a proverb: “Is Saul also among the prophets?” **<sup>13</sup>** And when he had finished prophesying, he came to the high place.

**<sup>14</sup>** Now Saul’s uncle said to him and to his servant, “Where did you go?” And he said, “To seek the donkeys. And when we saw that they were not to be found, we went to Samuel.” **<sup>15</sup>** Then Saul’s uncle said, “Please tell me what Samuel said to you.” **<sup>16</sup>** And Saul said to his uncle, “He told us plainly that the donkeys had been found.” But he did not tell him about the matter of the kingdom which Samuel had mentioned.

**<sup>17</sup>** Then Samuel called the people together to the LORD at Mizpah. **<sup>18</sup>** And he said to the sons of Israel, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and I delivered you from the hand of the Egyptians and from the hand of all the kingdoms that oppressed you.’ **<sup>19</sup>** But today you have rejected your God, who Himself saves you from all your calamities and your distresses, and you have said to Him, ‘No, but set a king over us!’ Now therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes and by your thousands.”

**<sup>20</sup>** So Samuel brought near all the tribes of Israel, and the tribe of Benjamin was taken by lot. **<sup>21</sup>** Then he brought near the tribe of Benjamin by its clans, and the clan of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was taken. But when they sought him, he could not be found. **<sup>22</sup>** So they inquired again of the LORD, “Has the man come here yet?” And the LORD said, “Behold, he is hiding himself among the baggage.”

**<sup>23</sup>** So they ran and took him from there. And when he stood among the people, he was taller than all the people from his shoulders upward. **<sup>24</sup>** And Samuel said to all the people, “Do you see the one whom the LORD has chosen? Surely there is none like him among all the people.” And all the people shouted and said, “Long live the king!”

**<sup>25</sup>** Then Samuel told the people the ordinance of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book and laid it up before the LORD. And Samuel sent all the people away, each to his house. **<sup>26</sup>** Saul also went to his house at Gibeah; and the valiant men whose hearts God had touched went with him. **<sup>27</sup>** But some worthless men said, “How can this man save us?” And they despised him and brought him no gift. But he kept silent. 

## Chapter 11

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Nahash the Ammonite came up and encamped against Jabesh-gilead. And all the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, “Make a treaty with us, and we will serve you.” **<sup>2</sup>** But Nahash the Ammonite said to them, “On this condition I will make a treaty with you—by gouging out every man's right eye, thus bringing disgrace on all Israel.” **<sup>3</sup>** And the elders of Jabesh said to him, “Give us seven days' respite, that we may send messengers through all the territory of Israel. Then, if there is no one to deliver us, we will come out to you.”

**<sup>4</sup>** So the messengers came to Gibeah of Saul and spoke these words in the ears of the people. And all the people lifted up their voices and wept. **<sup>5</sup>** Now at this time, Saul was coming from the field behind the oxen, and Saul said, “What is wrong with the people, that they are weeping?” So they recounted to him the words of the men of Jabesh. **<sup>6</sup>** And the Spirit of God rushed upon Saul when he heard these words, and his anger burned greatly. **<sup>7</sup>** So he took a yoke of oxen and cut them in pieces and sent them throughout all the territory of Israel by the hand of messengers, saying, “Whoever does not come out after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done to his oxen.” Then the dread of the LORD fell upon the people, and they came out as one man. **<sup>8</sup>** And he mustered them at Bezek, and the sons of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.

**<sup>9</sup>** Then they said to the messengers who had come, “Thus shall you say to the men of Jabesh-gilead, ‘Tomorrow, by the time the sun is hot, you shall have deliverance.’” So the messengers went and told the men of Jabesh, and they rejoiced. **<sup>10</sup>** Then the men of Jabesh said, “Tomorrow we will come out to you, and you may do to us whatever seems good in your eyes.” **<sup>11</sup>** And it came to pass the next day that Saul put the people in three companies, and they came into the midst of the camp during the morning watch and struck down the Ammonites until the heat of the day. And those who remained were scattered, so that no two of them were left together.

**<sup>12</sup>** Then the people said to Samuel, “Who is it that said, ‘Shall Saul reign over us?’ Bring the men, that we may put them to death.” **<sup>13</sup>** But Saul said, “No man shall be put to death this day, for today the LORD has worked deliverance in Israel.”

**<sup>14</sup>** Then Samuel said to the people, “Come, let us go to Gilgal, and there renew the kingdom.”

**<sup>15</sup>** And all the people went to Gilgal, and there they made Saul king before the LORD in Gilgal. And there they offered sacrifices of peace offerings before the LORD, and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly. 

## Chapter 12

**<sup>1</sup>** Samuel said to all Israel, “Behold, I have listened to your voice in all that you said to me and have made a king reign over you. **<sup>2</sup>** Now, behold, the king walks before you, and I am old and gray, and my sons are with you. I have walked before you from my youth until this day. **<sup>3</sup>** Here I am; testify against me before the LORD and before His anointed. Whose ox have I taken? Or whose donkey have I taken? Whom have I oppressed? Whom have I defrauded? From whose hand have I taken a bribe to blind my eyes with it? Testify against me, and I will restore it to you.”

**<sup>4</sup>** And they said, “You have not defrauded us or oppressed us or taken anything from any man's hand.”

**<sup>5</sup>** And he said to them, “The LORD is witness against you, and His anointed is witness this day, that you have found nothing in my hand.” And they said, “He is witness.”

**<sup>6</sup>** Then Samuel said to the people, “The LORD is witness, who appointed Moses and Aaron and who brought your fathers up from the land of Egypt. **<sup>7</sup>** Now therefore stand still, that I may judge you before the LORD concerning all the righteous acts of the LORD which He did for you and for your fathers. **<sup>8</sup>** When Jacob came into Egypt and your fathers cried out to the LORD, then the LORD sent Moses and Aaron, and they brought your fathers out of Egypt and settled them in this place. **<sup>9</sup>** But they forgot the LORD their God, and He sold them into the hand of Sisera, commander of the army of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them. **<sup>10</sup>** Then they cried out to the LORD and said, ‘We have sinned, for we have forsaken the LORD and served the Baals and the Ashtaroth. But now deliver us from the hand of our enemies, and we will serve You.’ **<sup>11</sup>** And the LORD sent Jerubbaal and Bedan and Jephthah and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and you lived in safety. **<sup>12</sup>** But when you saw that Nahash the king of the sons of Ammon came against you, you said to me, ‘No, but a king shall reign over us’—though the LORD your God was your king.

**<sup>13</sup>** Now behold the king whom you have chosen, for whom you have asked—behold, the LORD has set a king over you. **<sup>14</sup>** If you will fear the LORD and serve Him and listen to His voice and not rebel against the command of the LORD, then both you and the king who reigns over you will follow the LORD your God. **<sup>15</sup>** But if you will not listen to the voice of the LORD but rebel against the command of the LORD, then the hand of the LORD will be against you and your fathers. **<sup>16</sup>** Now also, stand still and see this great thing that the LORD will do before your eyes. **<sup>17</sup>** Is it not wheat harvest today? I will call upon the LORD, that He may send thunder and rain, and you will know and see that your wickedness is great, which you have done in the sight of the LORD, in asking for yourselves a king.”

**<sup>18</sup>** So Samuel called upon the LORD, and the LORD sent thunder and rain that day, and all the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel. **<sup>19</sup>** And all the people said to Samuel, “Pray for your servants to the LORD your God, that we not die, for we have added to all our sins this evil, to ask for ourselves a king.”

**<sup>20</sup>** And Samuel said to the people, “Do not fear. You have done all this evil, yet do not turn aside from following the LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart. **<sup>21</sup>** And do not turn aside after empty things that cannot profit or deliver, for they are nothing. **<sup>22</sup>** For the LORD will not forsake His people for His great name’s sake, because it has pleased the LORD to make you a people for Himself. **<sup>23</sup>** Moreover, as for me, far be it from me that I should sin against the LORD by ceasing to pray for you, but I will instruct you in the good and right way. **<sup>24</sup>** Only fear the LORD and serve Him in truth with all your heart, for consider what great things He has done for you. **<sup>25</sup>** But if you still do wickedly, you shall be swept away, both you and your king.” 

## Chapter 13

**<sup>1</sup>** Saul was [thirty] years old when he began to reign, and he reigned over Israel for two years. **<sup>2</sup>** Saul chose for himself three thousand men from Israel: two thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in the hill country of Bethel, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin. The rest of the people he sent away, each to his tent.

**<sup>3</sup>** Jonathan struck the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. Then Saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, “Let the Hebrews hear!” **<sup>4</sup>** And all Israel heard it said that Saul had struck the garrison of the Philistines, and also that Israel had become odious to the Philistines. So the people were summoned to Saul at Gilgal. **<sup>5</sup>** And the Philistines gathered to fight with Israel: thirty thousand chariots, six thousand horsemen, and troops like the sand on the seashore in multitude. They came up and encamped at Michmash, east of Beth-aven.

**<sup>6</sup>** When the men of Israel saw that they were in distress—for the people were hard-pressed—the people hid themselves in caves and thickets, in rocks, in cellars, and in pits. **<sup>7</sup>** And some Hebrews crossed the Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. But Saul was still in Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling. **<sup>8</sup>** And he waited seven days, the time appointed by Samuel, but Samuel did not come to Gilgal, and the people were scattering from him.

**<sup>9</sup>** So Saul said, “Bring the burnt offering and the peace offerings here to me.” And he offered the burnt offering.

**<sup>10</sup>** Just as he finished offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came. And Saul went out to meet him and to bless him.

**<sup>11</sup>** But Samuel said, “What have you done?” And Saul said, “Because I saw that the people were scattering from me, and that you did not come within the appointed days, and that the Philistines were assembling at Michmash, **<sup>12</sup>** I said, ‘Now the Philistines will come down against me at Gilgal, and I have not sought the favor of the LORD.’ So I forced myself and offered the burnt offering.”

**<sup>13</sup>** Then Samuel said to Saul, “You have acted foolishly. You have not kept the command of the LORD your God, which He commanded you. For then the LORD would have established your kingdom over Israel forever. **<sup>14</sup>** But now your kingdom shall not endure. The LORD has sought for Himself a man after His own heart, and the LORD has appointed him to be ruler over His people, because you have not kept what the LORD commanded you.”

**<sup>15</sup>** Then Samuel rose and went up from Gilgal to Gibeah of Benjamin. And Saul counted the people who were present with him, about six hundred men. **<sup>16</sup>** And Saul and Jonathan his son and the people who were present with them stayed in Geba of Benjamin, while the Philistines encamped at Michmash.

**<sup>17</sup>** And raiders came out of the camp of the Philistines in three companies: one company turned toward Ophrah, to the land of Shual, **<sup>18</sup>** and another company turned toward Beth-horon, and another company turned toward the border that overlooks the Valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.

**<sup>19</sup>** Now there was no blacksmith to be found in all the land of Israel, for the Philistines said, “Lest the Hebrews make swords or spears.” **<sup>20</sup>** So all Israel had to go down to the Philistines to sharpen each man his plowshare, his mattock, his axe, and his sickle, **<sup>21</sup>** and the price was a pim for the plowshares, the mattocks, the forks, and the axes, and to set the goads.

**<sup>22</sup>** So it came to pass on the day of battle that neither sword nor spear was found in the hand of any of the people who were with Saul and Jonathan. But Saul and Jonathan his son had them. **<sup>23</sup>** And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the pass of Michmash. 

## Chapter 14

**<sup>1</sup>** Now it came to pass one day that Jonathan the son of Saul said to the young man who carried his armor, “Come, let us cross over to the Philistines’ garrison that is on the other side.” But he did not tell his father. **<sup>2</sup>** And Saul was staying on the outskirts of Gibeah under the pomegranate tree which is in Migron; and the people who were with him were about six hundred men, **<sup>3</sup>** and Ahijah the son of Ahitub, Ichabod’s brother, son of Phinehas, son of Eli, priest of the LORD at Shiloh, was wearing the ephod. But the people did not know that Jonathan had gone.

**<sup>4</sup>** Now between the passes by which Jonathan sought to go over to the Philistines’ garrison, there was a rocky crag on one side and a rocky crag on the other side; the name of one was Bozez, and the name of the other was Seneh. **<sup>5</sup>** One crag rose on the north opposite Michmash, and the other on the south opposite Geba. **<sup>6</sup>** And Jonathan said to the young man who carried his armor, “Come, let us cross over to the garrison of these uncircumcised; perhaps the LORD will act for us, for nothing restrains the LORD from saving by many or by few.” **<sup>7</sup>** And his armor-bearer said to him, “Do all that is in your heart; turn yourself, here I am with you according to your heart.” **<sup>8</sup>** Then Jonathan said, “Behold, we will cross over to the men and reveal ourselves to them. **<sup>9</sup>** If they say to us, ‘Wait until we come to you,’ then we will stand in our place and not go up to them. **<sup>10</sup>** But if they say, ‘Come up to us,’ then we will go up, for the LORD has given them into our hand, and this shall be the sign for us.”

**<sup>11</sup>** So both of them revealed themselves to the garrison of the Philistines. And the Philistines said, “Behold, Hebrews are coming out of the holes where they have hidden themselves.” **<sup>12</sup>** And the men of the garrison called to Jonathan and his armor-bearer and said, “Come up to us and we will show you something.” Then Jonathan said to his armor-bearer, “Come up after me, for the LORD has given them into the hand of Israel.” **<sup>13</sup>** And Jonathan climbed up on his hands and feet, and his armor-bearer after him. And they fell before Jonathan, and his armor-bearer was putting them to death after him. **<sup>14</sup>** And that first slaughter which Jonathan and his armor-bearer made was about twenty men, within about half a furrow in an acre of field. **<sup>15</sup>** And there was trembling in the camp, in the field, and among all the people; the garrison and the raiders also trembled, and the earth quaked, and it became a trembling from God.

**<sup>16</sup>** And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked, and behold, the multitude was melting away and going here and there. **<sup>17</sup>** Then Saul said to the people who were with him, “Call the roll now and see who has gone from us.” And when they had called the roll, behold, Jonathan and his armor-bearer were not there. **<sup>18</sup>** And Saul said to Ahijah, “Bring the ark of God here.” For the ark of God was at that time with the sons of Israel. **<sup>19</sup>** And it came to pass, while Saul spoke to the priest, that the tumult in the camp of the Philistines kept increasing more and more. So Saul said to the priest, “Withdraw your hand.” **<sup>20</sup>** Then Saul and all the people who were with him assembled and went into the battle, and behold, every man’s sword was against his fellow, and there was very great confusion. **<sup>21</sup>** Moreover, the Hebrews who were with the Philistines previously, who had gone up with them into the camp all around, they also changed sides to be with the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan. **<sup>22</sup>** Likewise all the men of Israel who had hidden themselves in the hill country of Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines were fleeing, they also pursued them in battle. **<sup>23</sup>** So the LORD saved Israel that day, and the battle passed beyond Beth-aven.

**<sup>24</sup>** And the men of Israel were hard-pressed that day, and Saul had put the people under oath, saying, “Cursed be the man who eats food before evening, and until I have avenged myself on my enemies.” So none of the people tasted food. **<sup>25</sup>** And all the land entered the forest, and there was honey on the surface of the ground. **<sup>26</sup>** And when the people came into the forest, behold, the honey was dripping, but no man put his hand to his mouth, for the people feared the oath. **<sup>27</sup>** But Jonathan had not heard when his father put the people under oath. So he put out the end of the staff that was in his hand and dipped it in the honeycomb, and he put his hand to his mouth, and his eyes brightened. **<sup>28</sup>** Then one of the people answered and said, “Your father strictly put the people under oath, saying, ‘Cursed be the man who eats food this day.’” And the people were faint.

**<sup>29</sup>** Then Jonathan said, “My father has troubled the land. See now how my eyes have brightened because I tasted a little of this honey. **<sup>30</sup>** How much more if the people had eaten freely today of the spoil of their enemies which they found! For now the slaughter among the Philistines has not been great.”

**<sup>31</sup>** And they struck down the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon, and the people were very faint. **<sup>32</sup>** And the people rushed greedily upon the spoil, and took sheep and oxen and calves, and slaughtered them on the ground; and the people ate them with the blood.

**<sup>33</sup>** Then they told Saul, saying, “Behold, the people are sinning against the LORD by eating with the blood.” And he said, “You have acted treacherously; roll a large stone to me today.” **<sup>34</sup>** And Saul said, “Disperse yourselves among the people and say to them, ‘Each man bring me his ox or his sheep and slaughter it here and eat, and do not sin against the LORD by eating with the blood.’” So every man brought his ox with him that night and slaughtered it there. **<sup>35</sup>** And Saul built an altar to the LORD; it was the first altar he built to the LORD. **<sup>36</sup>** Then Saul said, “Let us go down after the Philistines by night and plunder them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man among them.” And they said, “Do whatever seems good to you.” But the priest said, “Let us draw near to God here.” **<sup>37</sup>** And Saul inquired of God, “Shall I go down after the Philistines? Will You give them into the hand of Israel?” But He did not answer him that day.

**<sup>38</sup>** So Saul said, “Come here, all you chiefs of the people, and know and see in what this sin has happened today. **<sup>39</sup>** For as the LORD lives, who saves Israel, even if it is in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die.” But not one of all the people answered him. **<sup>40</sup>** Then he said to all Israel, “You shall be on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side.” And the people said to Saul, “Do what is good in your eyes.” **<sup>41</sup>** And Saul said to the LORD, the God of Israel, “Give a perfect lot.” And Jonathan and Saul were taken by lot, but the people escaped. **<sup>42</sup>** And Saul said, “Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son.” And Jonathan was taken.

**<sup>43</sup>** Then Saul said to Jonathan, “Tell me what you have done.” And Jonathan told him and said, “I certainly tasted a little honey with the end of the staff that was in my hand. Here I am; I must die.”

**<sup>44</sup>** And Saul said, “May God do so and more also, for you shall surely die, Jonathan.”

**<sup>45</sup>** But the people said to Saul, “Shall Jonathan die, who has brought about this great salvation in Israel? Far be it! As the LORD lives, not a hair of his head shall fall to the ground, for he has worked with God this day.” So the people rescued Jonathan, and he did not die. **<sup>46</sup>** Then Saul went up from pursuing the Philistines, and the Philistines went to their place. **<sup>47</sup>** And Saul took the kingship over Israel and fought against all his enemies on every side: against Moab, and against the sons of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines; and wherever he turned, he prevailed. **<sup>48</sup>** And he acted valiantly and struck the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hand of those who plundered them.

**<sup>49</sup>** Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan and Ishvi and Malchi-shua, and the names of his two daughters were these: the name of the firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal. **<sup>50</sup>** And the name of Saul’s wife was Ahinoam the daughter of Ahimaaz. And the name of the commander of his army was Abner the son of Ner, Saul’s uncle. **<sup>51</sup>** And Kish was the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.

**<sup>52</sup>** And the war against the Philistines was severe all the days of Saul. And whenever Saul saw any mighty man or any valiant man, he took him to himself. 

## Chapter 15

**<sup>1</sup>** And Samuel said to Saul, “The LORD sent me to anoint you as king over His people, over Israel; now therefore listen to the voice of the words of the LORD. **<sup>2</sup>** Thus says the LORD of hosts: ‘I have attended to what Amalek did to Israel, how he set himself against him on the way as he came up from Egypt. **<sup>3</sup>** Now go and strike Amalek and put under the ban all that he has. Do not spare him, but put to death man and woman, child and infant, ox and sheep, camel and donkey.’”

**<sup>4</sup>** So Saul summoned the troops and mustered them at Telaim: two hundred thousand foot soldiers and ten thousand men of Judah. **<sup>5</sup>** And Saul came to the city of Amalek and lay in wait in the valley. **<sup>6</sup>** And Saul said to the Kenites, “Go, withdraw, come down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them; for you showed kindness to all the sons of Israel when they came up from Egypt.” So the Kenites withdrew from among Amalek.

**<sup>7</sup>** And Saul struck the Amalekites from Havilah as far as Shur, which is east of Egypt. **<sup>8</sup>** And he captured Agag the king of Amalek alive, but all the people he put under the ban with the edge of the sword. **<sup>9</sup>** But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep and the oxen and the fattened ones and the lambs, and all that was good, and were unwilling to put them under the ban. But all that was despised and worthless, that they utterly destroyed.

**<sup>10</sup>** Then the word of the LORD came to Samuel, saying, **<sup>11</sup>** “I regret that I have made Saul king, for he has turned back from following Me and has not carried out My words.” And Samuel was angry, and he cried out to the LORD all night. **<sup>12</sup>** And Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning. And it was told to Samuel, saying, “Saul came to Carmel, and behold, he set up a monument for himself and turned and passed on and went down to Gilgal.”

**<sup>13</sup>** And Samuel came to Saul, and Saul said to him, “Blessed are you of the LORD. I have carried out the word of the LORD.”

**<sup>14</sup>** But Samuel said, “What then is this sound of sheep in my ears, and the sound of oxen that I hear?”

**<sup>15</sup>** And Saul said, “They brought them from the Amalekites, for the people spared the best of the sheep and oxen to sacrifice to the LORD your God; but the rest we have put under the ban.”

**<sup>16</sup>** Then Samuel said to Saul, “Stop, and I will declare to you what the LORD said to me last night.” And he said to him, “Speak.”

**<sup>17</sup>** And Samuel said, “Though you are small in your own eyes, are you not the head of the tribes of Israel? And the LORD anointed you king over Israel. **<sup>18</sup>** And the LORD sent you on a mission and said, ‘Go, and utterly destroy the sinners, the Amalekites, and fight against them until they are consumed.’ **<sup>19</sup>** Why then did you not obey the voice of the LORD, but rushed upon the spoil and did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD?”

**<sup>20</sup>** And Saul said to Samuel, “I did obey the voice of the LORD and went on the mission on which the LORD sent me, and I brought Agag the king of Amalek, and I put Amalek under the ban. **<sup>21</sup>** But the people took from the spoil, sheep and oxen, the best of what was under the ban, to sacrifice to the LORD your God in Gilgal.”

**<sup>22</sup>** Then Samuel said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Does the LORD delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;as in obeying the voice of the LORD?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and to listen than the fat of rams.<br/>
**<sup>23</sup>** For rebellion is as the sin of divination,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and arrogance is as iniquity and idolatry.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Because you have rejected the word of the LORD,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He has rejected you from being king.”

**<sup>24</sup>** And Saul said to Samuel, “I have sinned, for I transgressed the command of the LORD and your words, because I feared the people and listened to their voice. **<sup>25</sup>** Now therefore, please pardon my sin and return with me, that I may bow down to the LORD.”

**<sup>26</sup>** But Samuel said to Saul, “I will not return with you, for you have rejected the word of the LORD, and the LORD has rejected you from being king over Israel.” **<sup>27</sup>** And Samuel turned to go, but he grabbed the edge of his robe, and it tore. **<sup>28</sup>** And Samuel said to him, “The LORD has torn the kingdom of Israel from you this day and has given it to your neighbor, who is better than you. **<sup>29</sup>** And also the Glory of Israel does not lie or relent, for He is not a man, that He should relent.”

**<sup>30</sup>** Then he said, “I have sinned; yet please honor me now before the elders of my people and before Israel, and return with me, that I may bow down to the LORD your God.” **<sup>31</sup>** So Samuel turned back after Saul, and Saul bowed down to the LORD.

**<sup>32</sup>** Then Samuel said, “Bring here to me Agag the king of Amalek.” And Agag came to him cheerfully. And Agag said, “Surely the bitterness of death is past.”

**<sup>33</sup>** But Samuel said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“As your sword has made women childless,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;so shall your mother be childless among women.”<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And Samuel hacked Agag to pieces before the LORD in Gilgal.

**<sup>34</sup>** Then Samuel went to Ramah, and Saul went up to his house at Gibeah of Saul. **<sup>35</sup>** And Samuel did not see Saul again until the day of his death,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;though Samuel grieved over Saul.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And the LORD regretted that He had made Saul king over Israel.<br/>


## Chapter 16

**<sup>1</sup>** And the LORD said to Samuel, “How long will you mourn for Saul, since I have rejected him from being king over Israel? Fill your horn with oil and go; I will send you to Jesse the Bethlehemite, for I have provided for Myself a king from among his sons.”

**<sup>2</sup>** But Samuel said, “How can I go? If Saul hears of it, he will kill me.” And the LORD said, “Take a heifer with you and say, ‘I have come to sacrifice to the LORD.’ **<sup>3</sup>** Then invite Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will make known to you what you shall do. You shall anoint for Me the one whom I designate to you.”

**<sup>4</sup>** So Samuel did what the LORD had said and came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the city came trembling to meet him and said, “Do you come in peace?” **<sup>5</sup>** He said, “In peace; I have come to sacrifice to the LORD. Consecrate yourselves and come with me to the sacrifice.” And he consecrated Jesse and his sons and invited them to the sacrifice. **<sup>6</sup>** And when they came, he looked on Eliab and thought, “Surely the LORD’s anointed is before Him.” **<sup>7</sup>** But the LORD said to Samuel, “Do not look at his appearance or at the height of his stature, for I have rejected him. For the LORD does not see as man sees; for man looks at the outward appearance, but the LORD looks at the heart.”

**<sup>8</sup>** Then Jesse called Abinadab and made him pass before Samuel. And he said, “The LORD has not chosen this one either.” **<sup>9</sup>** Then Jesse made Shammah pass by. And he said, “The LORD has not chosen this one either.” **<sup>10</sup>** Jesse made seven of his sons pass before Samuel, but Samuel said to Jesse, “The LORD has not chosen these.” **<sup>11</sup>** And Samuel said to Jesse, “Are these all the boys?” And he said, “There remains yet the youngest, but he is tending the sheep.” Then Samuel said to Jesse, “Send and bring him, for we will not sit down until he comes here.”

**<sup>12</sup>** So he sent and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, with beautiful eyes and a good appearance. And the LORD said, “Arise, anoint him, for this is he.” **<sup>13</sup>** Then Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the midst of his brothers. And the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon David from that day forward. And Samuel rose and went to Ramah.

**<sup>14</sup>** Now the Spirit of the LORD had departed from Saul, and a harmful spirit from the LORD tormented him. **<sup>15</sup>** And Saul’s servants said to him, “Behold now, a harmful spirit from God is tormenting you. **<sup>16</sup>** Let our lord command your servants who are before you to seek a man who is skillful in playing the lyre. And it shall be, when the harmful spirit from God is upon you, that he shall play with his hand, and you will be well.”

**<sup>17</sup>** So Saul said to his servants, “Provide for me now a man who plays well and bring him to me.”

**<sup>18</sup>** Then one of the young men answered and said, “Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, who is skillful in playing, a mighty man of valor, a warrior, prudent in speech, and a man of good form, and the LORD is with him.” **<sup>19</sup>** So Saul sent messengers to Jesse and said, “Send me David your son, who is with the sheep.” **<sup>20</sup>** And Jesse took a donkey loaded with bread and a skin of wine and a young goat and sent them by his son David to Saul. **<sup>21</sup>** And David came to Saul and entered his service. And Saul loved him greatly, and he became his armor-bearer. **<sup>22</sup>** And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, “Let David remain in my service, for he has found favor in my sight.” **<sup>23</sup>** And whenever the spirit from God came upon Saul, David would take the lyre and play with his hand. Then Saul would be refreshed and well, and the harmful spirit would depart from him. 

## Chapter 17

**<sup>1</sup>** Now the Philistines gathered their armies for battle, and they were assembled at Socoh, which belongs to Judah. They camped between Socoh and Azekah, in Ephes-dammim. **<sup>2</sup>** And Saul and the men of Israel assembled and camped in the Valley of Elah, and they drew up in battle array to meet the Philistines. **<sup>3</sup>** The Philistines stood on the mountain on one side, and Israel stood on the mountain on the other side, with a valley between them. **<sup>4</sup>** Then a champion came out from the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, from Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span. **<sup>5</sup>** He had a bronze helmet on his head, and he wore scale armor, and the weight of the bronze armor was five thousand shekels. **<sup>6</sup>** He had bronze greaves on his legs, and a bronze javelin was slung between his shoulders. **<sup>7</sup>** The shaft of his spear was like a weaver's beam, and the iron point of his spear weighed six hundred shekels. His shield-bearer went before him. **<sup>8</sup>** He stood and called out to the ranks of Israel and said to them, “Why do you come out to form battle lines? Am I not the Philistine, and you the servants of Saul? Choose a man for yourselves and let him come down to me. **<sup>9</sup>** If he is able to fight with me and kill me, then we will become your servants; but if I prevail against him and kill him, then you shall become our servants and serve us.” **<sup>10</sup>** And the Philistine said, “I defy the battle lines of Israel this day. Give me a man, that we may fight together.” **<sup>11</sup>** When Saul and all Israel heard these words of the Philistine, they were dismayed and greatly afraid.

**<sup>12</sup>** Now David was the son of an Ephrathite of Bethlehem in Judah named Jesse, who had eight sons. In the days of Saul, the man was old and advanced in years. **<sup>13</sup>** The three oldest sons of Jesse had gone after Saul to the battle. The names of his three sons who went to the battle were: Eliab the firstborn, and the second to him Abinadab, and the third Shammah. **<sup>14</sup>** Now David was the youngest. The three oldest had followed Saul, **<sup>15</sup>** but David would go back and forth from Saul to tend his father’s flock at Bethlehem. **<sup>16</sup>** The Philistine came forward morning and evening, and took his stand for forty days.

**<sup>17</sup>** Then Jesse said to David his son, “Take now for your brothers an ephah of this roasted grain and these ten loaves, and carry them quickly to the camp to your brothers. **<sup>18</sup>** Also take these ten cheeses to the commander of their thousand. See if your brothers are well, and bring back some token from them.”

**<sup>19</sup>** Now Saul and they and all the men of Israel were in the Valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines. **<sup>20</sup>** So David rose early in the morning, left the flock with a keeper, and took the provisions and went, as Jesse had commanded him. And he came to the encampment as the army was going out to the battle line shouting the war cry. **<sup>21</sup>** Israel and the Philistines drew up in battle array, army against army. **<sup>22</sup>** And David left the provisions in the care of the keeper of supplies and ran to the battle line. He went and greeted his brothers. **<sup>23</sup>** As he was speaking with them, behold, the champion, the Philistine of Gath named Goliath, came up from the ranks of the Philistines and spoke the same words as before, and David heard them. **<sup>24</sup>** And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him and were greatly afraid.

**<sup>25</sup>** And the men of Israel said, “Have you seen this man who is coming up? Surely he is coming up to defy Israel. And it shall be that the man who kills him, the king will enrich him with great riches, will give him his daughter, and make his father’s house exempt in Israel.” **<sup>26</sup>** Then David spoke to the men standing with him and said, “What will be done for the man who kills this Philistine and takes away the disgrace from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?” **<sup>27</sup>** And the people answered him in the same way, “Thus shall it be done to the man who kills him.”

**<sup>28</sup>** Now Eliab his oldest brother heard him speaking to the men, and Eliab’s anger burned against David, and he said, “Why have you come down? And with whom have you left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know your pride and the evil of your heart, for you have come down to see the battle.” **<sup>29</sup>** And David said, “What have I done now? Was it not just a word?” **<sup>30</sup>** Then he turned away from him to another and said the same thing, and those men answered him as before. **<sup>31</sup>** When the words which David spoke were heard, they were reported to Saul, and he sent for him. **<sup>32</sup>** And David said to Saul, “Let no man’s heart fail because of him. Your servant will go and fight with this Philistine.”

**<sup>33</sup>** But Saul said to David, “You are not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him, for you are a youth, and he has been a man of war from his youth.” **<sup>34</sup>** But David said to Saul, “Your servant was tending his father's sheep, and when a lion or a bear came and took a lamb from the flock, **<sup>35</sup>** I went out after it and struck it and delivered it from its mouth. And when it rose against me, I caught it by its beard and struck it and killed it. **<sup>36</sup>** Your servant has struck down both the lion and the bear, and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be like one of them, for he has defied the armies of the living God.” **<sup>37</sup>** And David said, “The LORD who delivered me from the paw of the lion and from the paw of the bear will deliver me from the hand of this Philistine.” And Saul said to David, “Go, and may the LORD be with you.”

**<sup>38</sup>** Then Saul clothed David with his own garments, and put a bronze helmet on his head and clothed him with armor. **<sup>39</sup>** And David strapped his sword over his armor and tried to walk, for he had not trained in them. Then David said to Saul, “I cannot go with these, for I have not trained them.” So David took them off. **<sup>40</sup>** Then he took his staff in his hand and chose for himself five smooth stones from the brook, and put them in the shepherd's pouch which he had, even in his bag, and his sling was in his hand. Then he drew near to the Philistine.

**<sup>41</sup>** Then the Philistine came on and approached David, with the man bearing the shield in front of him. **<sup>42</sup>** And when the Philistine looked and saw David, he disdained him, for he was only a youth, ruddy and of good appearance. **<sup>43</sup>** And the Philistine said to David, “Am I a dog, that you come to me with sticks?” And the Philistine cursed David by his gods. **<sup>44</sup>** Then the Philistine said to David, “Come to me, and I will give your flesh to the birds of the heavens and to the beasts of the field.”

**<sup>45</sup>** Then David said to the Philistine, “You come to me with a sword and a spear and a javelin, but I come to you in the name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom you have defied. **<sup>46</sup>** This day the LORD will deliver you into my hand, and I will strike you down and remove your head from you. And I will give the corpses of the camp of the Philistines this day to the birds of the heavens and to the wild beasts of the earth, that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel, **<sup>47</sup>** and that all this assembly may know that the LORD does not save with sword or spear; for the battle is the LORD’s, and He will give you into our hand.”

**<sup>48</sup>** Then it came about that when the Philistine arose and came and drew near to meet David, David ran quickly toward the battle line to meet the Philistine. **<sup>49</sup>** And David put his hand into his bag and took from it a stone, and slung it, and struck the Philistine on his forehead. The stone sank into his forehead, and he fell on his face to the ground. **<sup>50</sup>** So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and a stone; he struck the Philistine and killed him. But there was no sword in David’s hand. **<sup>51</sup>** Then David ran and stood over the Philistine and took his sword and drew it from its sheath and killed him and cut off his head with it. When the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled. **<sup>52</sup>** Then the men of Israel and Judah rose up and shouted and pursued the Philistines as far as the entrance of the valley and to the gates of Ekron. And the slain Philistines fell along the way to Shaaraim and as far as Gath and Ekron. **<sup>53</sup>** Then the sons of Israel returned from hot pursuit of the Philistines and plundered their camp. **<sup>54</sup>** And David took the head of the Philistine and brought it to Jerusalem, but he put his weapons in his own tent.

**<sup>55</sup>** Now when Saul saw David going out against the Philistine, he said to Abner, the commander of the army, “Whose son is this young man, Abner?” And Abner said, “As your soul lives, O king, I do not know.” **<sup>56</sup>** And the king said, “Inquire whose son the youth is.” **<sup>57</sup>** So when David returned from striking down the Philistine, Abner took him and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand. **<sup>58</sup>** Then Saul said to him, “Whose son are you, young man?” And David said, “I am the son of your servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.” 

## Chapter 18

**<sup>1</sup>** And it came to pass, when he had finished speaking to Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit to the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. **<sup>2</sup>** Saul took him that day and did not let him return to his father's house. **<sup>3</sup>** Then Jonathan made a covenant with David, because he loved him as his own soul. **<sup>4</sup>** And Jonathan took off the robe he was wearing and gave it to David, as well as his armor, his sword, his bow, and his belt.

**<sup>5</sup>** And David went out wherever Saul sent him, and he prospered; and Saul set him over the men of war, and it was good in the eyes of all the servants and also in the eyes of the people. **<sup>6</sup>** And it came to pass, as they were coming, when David returned from striking down the Philistine, that the women came out from all the towns of Israel to sing and dance to meet King Saul, with tambourines, with joy, and with musical instruments. **<sup>7</sup>** And the women sang as they played, and said,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Saul has struck down his thousands,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and David his ten thousands.”<br/>
**<sup>8</sup>** Then Saul was very angry, and this saying displeased him. And he said, “They have ascribed to David ten thousands, but to me they have ascribed thousands. What more can he have but the kingdom?” **<sup>9</sup>** So Saul observed David from that day forward.

**<sup>10</sup>** And it came to pass the next day that a harmful spirit from God rushed upon Saul, and he raved in the midst of the house, and David was playing the lyre with his hand as he did day by day; and Saul had a spear in his hand. **<sup>11</sup>** And Saul threw the spear, for he said, “I will pin David to the wall.” But David evaded him twice. **<sup>12</sup>** And Saul was afraid of David, for the LORD was with him but had departed from Saul. **<sup>13</sup>** So Saul removed him from his presence and made him a commander of a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people. **<sup>14</sup>** And David prospered in all his ways, and the LORD was with him. **<sup>15</sup>** And when Saul saw that he prospered greatly, he stood in dread of him. **<sup>16</sup>** But all Israel and Judah loved David, for he went out and came in before them.

**<sup>17</sup>** Then Saul said to David, “Here is my older daughter Merab; I will give her to you as a wife. Only be a man of valor for me and fight the LORD's battles.” For Saul thought, “Let not my hand be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.” **<sup>18</sup>** And David said to Saul, “Who am I, and what is my life or my father's clan in Israel, that I should become the king's son-in-law?” **<sup>19</sup>** But it came to pass at the time when Merab, Saul’s daughter, should have been given to David, she was given to Adriel the Meholathite as a wife.

**<sup>20</sup>** Now Michal, Saul’s daughter, loved David; and when they told Saul, the thing pleased him. **<sup>21</sup>** And Saul said, “I will give her to him, that she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him.” So Saul said to David a second time, “You shall now be my son-in-law.”

**<sup>22</sup>** And Saul commanded his servants, “Speak to David secretly, saying, ‘Behold, the king delights in you, and all his servants love you. Now become the king’s son-in-law.’” **<sup>23</sup>** And Saul's servants spoke those words in David's ears. But David said, “Is it a light thing in your eyes to become the king’s son-in-law, since I am a poor man and lightly esteemed?” **<sup>24</sup>** And the servants of Saul told him, saying, “David has spoken in this way.” **<sup>25</sup>** Then Saul said, “Thus shall you say to David, ‘The king desires no bride-price except a hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged on the king's enemies.’” Now Saul intended to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines. **<sup>26</sup>** When his servants told David these words, it pleased David to become the king’s son-in-law. Before the appointed days expired, **<sup>27</sup>** David arose and went, he and his men, and struck down two hundred men of the Philistines. Then David brought their foreskins, and they counted them out before the king, that he might become the king’s son-in-law. Then Saul gave him Michal his daughter as a wife.

**<sup>28</sup>** And Saul saw and knew that the LORD was with David, and that Michal, Saul's daughter, loved him. **<sup>29</sup>** Then Saul grew even more afraid of David. So Saul was David’s enemy continually. **<sup>30</sup>** Then the commanders of the Philistines came out to battle, and as often as they came out, David was more successful than all the servants of Saul, so that his name was highly esteemed. 

## Chapter 19

**<sup>1</sup>** Saul spoke to Jonathan, his son and to all his servants, that they should put David to death. But Jonathan, Saul’s son, delighted greatly in David. **<sup>2</sup>** So Jonathan told David, saying, “Saul, my father, seeks to kill you. Now therefore, be on your guard in the morning, stay in a secret place and hide yourself. **<sup>3</sup>** And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where you are, and I will speak about you to my father. Then if I learn anything, I will tell you.”

**<sup>4</sup>** So Jonathan spoke well of David to Saul, his father, and said to him, “The king should not sin against his servant David, for he has not sinned against you, and his deeds have been very beneficial to you. **<sup>5</sup>** For he took his life in his hand and struck down the Philistines, and the LORD brought about a great deliverance for all Israel. You saw it and rejoiced. Why then will you sin against innocent blood by killing David without cause?”

**<sup>6</sup>** And Saul listened to the voice of Jonathan, and Saul swore, “As the LORD lives, he shall not be put to death.” **<sup>7</sup>** Then Jonathan called David, and Jonathan told him all these things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence as before.

**<sup>8</sup>** And there was war again, and David went out and fought with the Philistines and struck them with a great slaughter, and they fled before him. **<sup>9</sup>** Then a harmful spirit from the LORD came upon Saul as he sat in his house with his spear in his hand, while David was playing the lyre. **<sup>10</sup>** And Saul tried to pin David to the wall with the spear, but he slipped away from Saul’s presence, so that he struck the spear into the wall. And David fled and escaped that night.

**<sup>11</sup>** Then Saul sent messengers to David’s house to watch him, that he might kill him in the morning. But Michal, David’s wife, told him, saying, “If you do not save your life tonight, tomorrow you will be killed.” **<sup>12</sup>** So Michal let David down through the window, and he went and fled and escaped. **<sup>13</sup>** And Michal took the household idol and laid it on the bed, and put a quilt of goats’ hair at its head and covered it with the garment. **<sup>14</sup>** And when Saul sent messengers to seize David, she said, “He is sick.” **<sup>15</sup>** Then Saul sent the messengers to see David, saying, “Bring him to me in the bed, so I may kill him.”

**<sup>16</sup>** And when the messengers came in, they saw the household idol in the bed with the quilt of goats’ hair at its head. **<sup>17</sup>** And Saul said to Michal, “Why have you deceived me like this and let my enemy go, so that he escaped?” And Michal said to Saul, “He said to me, ‘Let me go! Why should I kill you?’”

**<sup>18</sup>** Now David fled and escaped, and he came to Samuel at Ramah and told him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and stayed at Naioth. **<sup>19</sup>** Then it was told to Saul, saying, “Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah.” **<sup>20</sup>** So Saul sent messengers to take David, but when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying and Samuel standing as head over them, the Spirit of God came upon the messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied. **<sup>21</sup>** And when it was told to Saul, he sent other messengers, and they also prophesied. So Saul sent messengers again a third time, and they also prophesied. **<sup>22</sup>** Then he himself went to Ramah and came to the great well that is in Secu. And he asked and said, “Where are Samuel and David?” And someone said, “Behold, they are at Naioth in Ramah.” **<sup>23</sup>** So he went there to Naioth in Ramah. And the Spirit of God came upon him also, and as he went, he prophesied until he came to Naioth in Ramah. **<sup>24</sup>** And he too stripped off his clothes and prophesied before Samuel, and lay naked all that day and all that night. Therefore they say, “Is Saul also among the prophets?” 

## Chapter 20

**<sup>1</sup>** Then David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and he came and said before Jonathan, “What have I done? What is my guilt, and what is my sin before your father, that he seeks my life?” **<sup>2</sup>** And he said to him, “Far from it! You shall not die. Behold, my father does nothing, either great or small, without revealing it to me. Why should my father hide this from me? It is not so.” **<sup>3</sup>** But David swore again and said, “Your father knows well that I have found favor in your eyes, and he thinks, ‘Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved.’ But truly, as the LORD lives and as your soul lives, there is but a step between me and death.”

**<sup>4</sup>** Then Jonathan said to David, “Whatever you say, I will do for you.” **<sup>5</sup>** And David said to Jonathan, “Behold, tomorrow is the new moon, and I ought to sit with the king at the meal. But let me go, that I may hide myself in the field until the evening of the third day. **<sup>6</sup>** If your father misses me at all, then say, ‘David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem his city, for the yearly sacrifice is there for all the clan.’ **<sup>7</sup>** If he says, ‘Good!’ it will be well with your servant; but if he is angry, then know that harm is determined by him. **<sup>8</sup>** Therefore deal kindly with your servant, for you have brought your servant into a covenant of the LORD with you. But if there is guilt in me, kill me yourself, for why should you bring me to your father?” **<sup>9</sup>** And Jonathan said, “Far be it from you! For if I knew that harm was determined by my father to come upon you, would I not tell you?” **<sup>10</sup>** Then David said to Jonathan, “Who will tell me if your father answers you harshly?”

**<sup>11</sup>** And Jonathan said to David, “Come, let us go out into the field.” So both of them went out into the field. **<sup>12</sup>** And Jonathan said to David, “By the LORD, the God of Israel, when I have sounded out my father about this time tomorrow or the third day, behold, if he is well disposed toward David, shall I not then send and disclose it to you? **<sup>13</sup>** But if it please my father to do you harm, may the LORD do so to Jonathan and more also, if I do not disclose it to you and send you away, that you may go in peace. May the LORD be with you as He has been with my father. **<sup>14</sup>** If I am still alive, show me the steadfast love of the LORD, that I may not die; **<sup>15</sup>** and do not cut off your steadfast love from my house forever, not even when the LORD cuts off every one of the enemies of David from the face of the earth.”

**<sup>16</sup>** So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, “May the LORD take vengeance on David’s enemies.” **<sup>17</sup>** And Jonathan again made David swear, because he loved him, for he loved him as his own soul.

**<sup>18</sup>** Then Jonathan said to him, “Tomorrow is the new moon, and you will be missed, because your seat will be empty. **<sup>19</sup>** On the third day go down quickly to the place where you hid yourself on the day of my father’s actions, and remain beside the stone Ezel. **<sup>20</sup>** And I will shoot three arrows to the side of it, as though I shot at a target. **<sup>21</sup>** And then, I will send the boy, saying, ‘Go, find the arrows.’ If I say to the boy, ‘Look, the arrows are on this side of you, take them,’ then come, for there is peace for you and it is safe, as the LORD lives. **<sup>22</sup>** But if I say to the young man, ‘Look, the arrows are beyond you,’ then escape, for the LORD has sent you away. **<sup>23</sup>** As for the matter of which you and I have spoken, behold, the LORD is between you and me forever.”

**<sup>24</sup>** So David hid himself in the field. And when the new moon came, the king sat down to eat the meal. **<sup>25</sup>** The king sat on his seat, as at other times, on the seat by the wall. Jonathan sat opposite, and Abner sat by Saul’s side, but David’s place was empty. **<sup>26</sup>** Yet Saul did not say anything that day, for he thought, “Something has happened to him. He is not clean; surely he is not clean.” **<sup>27</sup>** But on the second day, the day after the new moon, David’s place was still empty. And Saul said to Jonathan his son, “Why has the son of Jesse not come to the meal, either yesterday or today?”

**<sup>28</sup>** And Jonathan answered Saul, “David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem. **<sup>29</sup>** He said, ‘Let me go, please, for our clan holds a sacrifice in the city, and my brother has commanded me to be there. So now, if I have found favor in your eyes, let me go away to see my brothers.’ For this reason he has not come to the king’s table.”

**<sup>30</sup>** Then Saul’s anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said to him, “You son of a perverse and rebellious woman, do I not know that you have chosen the son of Jesse to your own shame and to the shame of your mother’s nakedness? **<sup>31</sup>** For as long as the son of Jesse lives on the earth, neither you nor your kingdom shall be established. Therefore send and bring him to me, for he shall surely die.” **<sup>32</sup>** Then Jonathan answered Saul his father, “Why should he be put to death? What has he done?” **<sup>33</sup>** But Saul hurled his spear at him to strike him. So Jonathan knew that his father was determined to kill David. **<sup>34</sup>** And Jonathan rose from the table in fierce anger and ate no food on the second day of the new moon, for he was grieved for David because his father had disgraced him.

**<sup>35</sup>** In the morning Jonathan went out into the field to the appointment with David, and a small boy was with him. **<sup>36</sup>** And he said to his boy, “Run, find the arrows that I shoot.” As the boy ran, he shot an arrow beyond him. **<sup>37</sup>** And when the boy came to the place of the arrow that Jonathan had shot, Jonathan called after the boy and said, “Is not the arrow beyond you?” **<sup>38</sup>** And Jonathan called after the boy, “Quick! Hurry! Do not stay!” So Jonathan’s boy gathered up the arrows and came to his master. **<sup>39</sup>** But the boy knew nothing; only Jonathan and David knew about the signal. **<sup>40</sup>** And Jonathan gave his weapons to his boy and said to him, “Go, carry them to the city.”

**<sup>41</sup>** As soon as the boy had gone, David rose from beside the stone heap and fell on his face to the ground and bowed three times. Then they kissed one another and wept with one another, David weeping the more. **<sup>42</sup>** And Jonathan said to David, “Go in peace, because we have sworn, both of us, in the name of the LORD, saying, ‘The LORD shall be between me and you, and between my descendents and your descendents, forever.’” Then he rose and departed, and Jonathan went into the city. 

## Chapter 21

**<sup>1</sup>** Then David came to Nob, to Ahimelech the priest. And Ahimelech trembled as he met David, and said to him, “Why are you alone, and no man with you?” **<sup>2</sup>** And David said to Ahimelech the priest, “The king has commissioned me with a matter and said to me, ‘Let no man know anything of the matter about which I am sending you and with which I have charged you.’ And I have directed the young men to such and such a place. **<sup>3</sup>** Now then, what do you have on hand? Give me five loaves of bread, or whatever can be found.”

**<sup>4</sup>** And the priest answered David and said, “There is no ordinary bread on hand, but there is holy bread—if the young men have kept themselves from women.” **<sup>5</sup>** And David answered the priest and said to him, “Indeed, women have been kept from us as always when I go out on campaign, and the vessels of the young men are holy, though it was but a common journey. How much more then today will their vessels be holy?”

**<sup>6</sup>** So the priest gave him the holy bread, for there was no bread there but the Bread of the Presence, which had been taken from before the LORD, to be replaced with hot bread on the day it was taken away. **<sup>7</sup>** Now one of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before the LORD; his name was Doeg the Edomite, chief of Saul’s herdsmen.

**<sup>8</sup>** And David said to Ahimelech, “Is there not here on hand a spear or a sword? For I did not bring my sword or my weapons with me, because the king’s matter was urgent.” **<sup>9</sup>** And the priest said, “The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom you struck down in the Valley of Elah, see, it is wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod. If you will take it, take it—for there is none but that here.” And David said, “There is none like it; give it to me.”

**<sup>10</sup>** Then David rose and fled that day from Saul, and came to Achish king of Gath. **<sup>11</sup>** But the servants of Achish said to him, “Is not this David the king of the land? Did they not sing of him to one another in dances, saying,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘Saul has struck down his thousands,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and David his tens of thousands’?”

**<sup>12</sup>** And David took these words to heart and was very much afraid of Achish king of Gath. **<sup>13</sup>** So he changed his behavior before them and pretended to be mad in their hands. He scratched marks on the doors of the gate and let his spittle run down his beard. **<sup>14</sup>** Then Achish said to his servants, “Look, you see the man is mad. Why then have you brought him to me? **<sup>15</sup>** Do I lack madmen, that you have brought this fellow to behave as a madman in my presence? Shall this man come into my house?” 

## Chapter 22

**<sup>1</sup>** David departed from there and escaped to the cave of Adullam. When his brothers and all his father’s house heard it, they went down there to him. **<sup>2</sup>** And every man who was in distress, and every man who had a creditor, and every man who was embittered, gathered to him, and he became commander over them. About four hundred men were there with him.

**<sup>3</sup>** David went from there to Mizpeh of Moab and said to the king of Moab, “Please let my father and my mother stay with you until I know what God will do for me.” **<sup>4</sup>** And he left them with the king of Moab, and they stayed with him all the time that David was in the stronghold. **<sup>5</sup>** But Gad the prophet said to David, “Do not stay in the stronghold. Depart and go into the land of Judah.” So David went and came to the forest of Hereth.

**<sup>6</sup>** Now Saul heard that David and the men who were with him had been discovered. Saul was sitting in Gibeah under the tamarisk tree on the height, with his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing around him. **<sup>7</sup>** Saul said to his servants who stood around him, “Hear now, Benjaminites! Will the son of Jesse also give every one of you fields and vineyards? Will he make you all commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds, **<sup>8</sup>** that all of you have conspired against me? No one discloses to me when my son makes a covenant with the son of Jesse! None of you is sorry for me or discloses to me that my son has stirred up my servant against me to lie in ambush, as on this day!”

**<sup>9</sup>** Then Doeg the Edomite, who was standing by the servants of Saul, answered and said, “I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech son of Ahitub. **<sup>10</sup>** And he inquired of the LORD for him and gave him provisions and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.”

**<sup>11</sup>** Then the king sent to summon Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father’s house, the priests who were in Nob, and they all came to the king. **<sup>12</sup>** And Saul said, “Listen now, son of Ahitub.” And he said, “Here I am, my lord.” **<sup>13</sup>** Saul said to him, “Why have you conspired against me, you and the son of Jesse, in that you gave him bread and a sword and inquired of God for him, so that he rose up against me to lie in ambush, as on this day?”

**<sup>14</sup>** Then Ahimelech answered the king and said, “Who among all your servants is as faithful as David, the king’s son-in-law and captain of your guard and honored in your house? **<sup>15</sup>** Is today the first time that I have inquired of God for him? Far be it from me! Let not the king lay anything to the charge of his servant or of any of the house of my father, for your servant knows nothing of this, little or much.” **<sup>16</sup>** But the king said, “You shall surely die, Ahimelech, you and all your father’s house.”

**<sup>17</sup>** And the king said to the guards who stood around him, “Turn and kill the priests of the LORD, because their hand also is with David, and because they knew that he was fleeing and did not disclose it to me.” But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to strike the priests of the LORD. **<sup>18</sup>** Then the king said to Doeg, “You turn and strike the priests.” So Doeg the Edomite turned and struck the priests, and he killed on that day eighty-five men who wore the linen ephod. **<sup>19</sup>** And he struck Nob, the city of the priests, with the edge of the sword—man and woman, child and infant, ox and donkey and sheep—all of them with the edge of the sword.

**<sup>20</sup>** But one of the sons of Ahimelech, son of Ahitub, whose name was Abiathar, escaped and fled after David. **<sup>21</sup>** And Abiathar told David that Saul had killed the priests of the LORD. **<sup>22</sup>** And David said to Abiathar, “I knew on that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul. I am responsible for the death of all the people in your father’s house. **<sup>23</sup>** Stay with me; do not be afraid. For he who seeks my life seeks your life. You will be safe with me.” 

## Chapter 23

**<sup>1</sup>** And they told David, saying, “Behold, the Philistines are fighting against Keilah and are plundering the threshing floors.” **<sup>2</sup>** So David inquired of the LORD, saying, “Shall I go and strike these Philistines?” And the LORD said to David, “Go and strike the Philistines and save Keilah.” **<sup>3</sup>** But David’s men said to him, “Behold, we are afraid here in Judah; how much more if we go to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?” **<sup>4</sup>** Then David inquired again of the LORD, and the LORD answered him and said, “Arise, go down to Keilah, for I will give the Philistines into your hand.” **<sup>5</sup>** So David and his men went to Keilah and fought with the Philistines and drove off their livestock and struck them with a great blow. Thus David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.

**<sup>6</sup>** Now when Abiathar son of Ahimelech fled to David at Keilah, he had come down with an ephod in his hand. **<sup>7</sup>** And it was told to Saul that David had come to Keilah. And Saul said, “God has delivered him into my hand, for he has shut himself in by entering a city with gates and bars.” **<sup>8</sup>** Then Saul summoned all the people to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men. **<sup>9</sup>** But David knew that Saul was plotting evil against him, and he said to Abiathar the priest, “Bring the ephod here.” **<sup>10</sup>** Then David said, “O LORD, the God of Israel, Your servant has surely heard that Saul seeks to come to Keilah to destroy the city on my account. **<sup>11</sup>** Will the men of Keilah surrender me into his hand? Will Saul come down, as Your servant has heard? O LORD, the God of Israel, please tell Your servant.” And the LORD said, “He will come down.” **<sup>12</sup>** Then David said, “Will the men of Keilah surrender me and my men into the hand of Saul?” And the LORD said, “They will surrender you.” **<sup>13</sup>** Then David and his men, about six hundred, arose and departed from Keilah, and they went wherever they could go. And when it was told to Saul that David had escaped from Keilah, he gave up the expedition.

**<sup>14</sup>** And David remained in the wilderness strongholds and stayed in the hill country of the Wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every day, but God did not give him into his hand. **<sup>15</sup>** And David saw that Saul had come out to seek his life. David was in the Wilderness of Ziph at Horesh. **<sup>16</sup>** And Jonathan, Saul’s son, rose and went to David at Horesh and strengthened his hand in God. **<sup>17</sup>** And he said to him, “Do not fear, for the hand of Saul my father shall not find you. You shall be king over Israel, and I shall be next to you. Saul, my father, also knows this.” **<sup>18</sup>** And the two of them made a covenant before the LORD. David remained at Horesh, and Jonathan went to his house.

**<sup>19</sup>** Then the Ziphites came up to Saul at Gibeah, saying, “Is not David hiding among us in the strongholds at Horesh, on the hill of Hachilah, which is south of Jeshimon? **<sup>20</sup>** Now then, O king, come down according to all the desire of your soul to come down, and our part will be to deliver him into the king’s hand.” **<sup>21</sup>** And Saul said, “May you be blessed by the LORD, for you have had compassion on me. **<sup>22</sup>** Go now, make sure. Know and see the place where his foot is and who has seen him there, for I have been told that he is very crafty. **<sup>23</sup>** Therefore, observe and take note of all the hiding places where he hides, and come back to me with details. Then I will go with you. And if he is in the land, I will search him out among all the thousands of Judah.”

**<sup>24</sup>** And they arose and went to Ziph ahead of Saul. Now David and his men were in the Wilderness of Maon, in the Arabah to the south of Jeshimon. **<sup>25</sup>** And Saul and his men went to seek him. And David was told, so he went down to the rock and stayed in the Wilderness of Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued David in the Wilderness of Maon. **<sup>26</sup>** Saul went on one side of the mountain, and David and his men were on the other side of the mountain. David was hurrying to get away from Saul, while Saul and his men were closing in on David and his men to capture them. **<sup>27</sup>** But a messenger came to Saul, saying, “Hurry and come, for the Philistines have raided the land.” **<sup>28</sup>** So Saul returned from pursuing David and went to meet the Philistines. Therefore that place was called the Rock of Escape. **<sup>29</sup>** And David went up from there and lived in the strongholds of En-gedi. 

## Chapter 24

**<sup>1</sup>** And it came to pass, when Saul returned from following the Philistines, that he was told, “Behold, David is in the wilderness of En-gedi.” **<sup>2</sup>** Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel and went to seek David and his men on the rocks of the wild goats. **<sup>3</sup>** And he came to the sheepfolds by the way, where there was a cave, and Saul went in to relieve himself. Now David and his men were sitting in the innermost parts of the cave.

**<sup>4</sup>** And the men of David said to him, “Look! The day of which the LORD said to you, ‘I will give your enemy into your hand, and you shall do to him as it seems good in your eyes.’” Then David arose and stealthily cut off the edge of Saul’s robe. **<sup>5</sup>** And afterward David’s heart struck him because he had cut off the edge of Saul’s robe. **<sup>6</sup>** And he said to his men, “Far be it from me, by the LORD, that I should do this thing to my lord, the LORD’s anointed, to stretch out my hand against him, for he is the LORD’s anointed.” **<sup>7</sup>** So David restrained his men with these words and did not allow them to attack Saul. Then Saul left the cave and went on his way.

**<sup>8</sup>** After this, David also arose and went out of the cave and called after Saul, saying, “My lord the king!” And when Saul looked behind him, David bowed with his face to the ground and prostrated himself. **<sup>9</sup>** And David said to Saul, “Why do you listen to the words of a man, saying, ‘See! David seeks your harm’? **<sup>10</sup>** Instead, this day your eyes have seen how the LORD gave you today into my hand in the cave. And some told me to kill you, but I spared you and said, ‘I will not stretch out my hand against my lord, for he is the LORD’s anointed.’ **<sup>11</sup>** And, my father, look—yes, look: the edge of your robe in my hand! Because I cut off the edge of your robe and did not kill you, know and see that there is no evil or transgression in my hand, and I have not sinned against you, though you lie in wait for my life to take it. **<sup>12</sup>** May the LORD judge between me and you, and may the LORD avenge me on you, but my hand shall not be against you. **<sup>13</sup>** As the proverb of the ancients says, ‘Out of the wicked comes wickedness,’ but my hand shall not be against you.

**<sup>14</sup>** After whom has the king of Israel come out? After whom are you pursuing? After a dead dog? After a single flea? **<sup>15</sup>** May the LORD therefore be judge and give sentence between me and you, and see and plead my cause and deliver me from your hand.”

**<sup>16</sup>** And so, when David finished speaking these words to Saul, he said, “Is this your voice, my son David?” And Saul lifted up his voice and wept. **<sup>17</sup>** And he said to David, “You are more righteous than I, for you have repaid me good, whereas I have repaid you with evil. **<sup>18</sup>** And you have shown this day how you have dealt well with me, that when the LORD delivered me into your hand, you did not kill me. **<sup>19</sup>** For what man, finding his enemy, lets him go away safely? So may the LORD reward you with good for what you have done to me this day.

**<sup>20</sup>** And now, behold, I know that you shall surely reign, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in your hand. **<sup>21</sup>** Now swear to me by the LORD that you will not cut off my descendants after me, and that you will not destroy my name from my father's house.” **<sup>22</sup>** So David swore to Saul. And Saul went to his house, but David and his men went up to the stronghold. 

## Chapter 25

**<sup>1</sup>** Now Samuel died, and all Israel assembled and mourned for him, and they buried him at his house in Ramah. Then David arose and went down to the wilderness of Paran.

**<sup>2</sup>** Now there was a man in Maon whose business was in Carmel. The man was very wealthy, and he had three thousand sheep and a thousand goats. And he was shearing his sheep in Carmel. **<sup>3</sup>** Now the name of the man was Nabal, and the name of his wife was Abigail. The woman was discerning and beautiful, but the man was harsh and evil in his dealings. He was a Calebite.

**<sup>4</sup>** David heard in the wilderness that Nabal was shearing his sheep. **<sup>5</sup>** So David sent ten young men, and David said to the young men, “Go up to Carmel, and go to Nabal and greet him in my name. **<sup>6</sup>** And thus you shall say to him, ‘Peace to you, and peace to your house, and peace to all that you have. **<sup>7</sup>** Now I hear that you have shearers. Now your shepherds have been with us, and we did them no harm, and nothing was missing from them all the time they were in Carmel. **<sup>8</sup>** Ask your young men, and they will tell you. Therefore let the young men find favor in your eyes, for we come on a feast day. Please give whatever you have at hand to your servants and to your son David.’” **<sup>9</sup>** And when David’s young men came, they spoke to Nabal according to all these words in the name of David. Then they waited.

**<sup>10</sup>** But Nabal answered David’s servants and said, “Who is David? And who is the son of Jesse? There are many servants these days who are breaking away from their masters. **<sup>11</sup>** Shall I then take my bread and my water and my meat that I have slaughtered for my shearers, and give it to men from who-knows-where?” **<sup>12</sup>** So David’s young men turned away and came back, and they told him all these words. **<sup>13</sup>** And David said to his men, “Each of you gird on his sword.” So each man girded on his sword, and David also girded on his sword. And about four hundred men went up after David, while two hundred remained with the baggage.

**<sup>14</sup>** But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal’s wife, saying, “Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to greet our master, and he cursed them. **<sup>15</sup>** Yet the men were very good to us, and we were not harmed, and we did not miss anything while we were in the fields as long as we were among them. **<sup>16</sup>** They were a wall to us both by night and by day, all the time we were with them keeping the sheep. **<sup>17</sup>** Now therefore know this and consider what you should do, for harm is determined against our master and against all his household, and he is such a worthless man that no one can speak to him.”

**<sup>18</sup>** Then Abigail hurried and took two hundred loaves of bread, two skins of wine, five prepared sheep, five seahs of parched grain, a hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and she loaded them on donkeys. **<sup>19</sup>** And she said to her young men, “Go on before me; for I am coming after you.” But she did not tell her husband Nabal. **<sup>20</sup>** And as she was riding on the donkey and came down under cover of the mountain, it happened that David and his men were coming down toward her, and she met them.

**<sup>21</sup>** Now David had said, “Surely in vain I have guarded all that this fellow has in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that belonged to him, and he has returned me evil for good. **<sup>22</sup>** God do so to the enemies of David and more also, if by morning I leave so much as one male of all who belong to him.”

**<sup>23</sup>** And when Abigail saw David, she hurried and got down from the donkey and fell before David on her face and bowed herself to the ground. **<sup>24</sup>** She fell at his feet and said, “On me alone, my lord, be the guilt. Please let your servant speak in your ears, and hear the words of your servant. **<sup>25</sup>** Let not my lord regard this worthless man, Nabal, for as his name is, so is he. Nabal is his name, and folly is with him. But I, your servant, did not see the young men of my lord, whom you sent.

**<sup>26</sup>** Now then, my lord, as the LORD lives and as your soul lives, since the LORD has restrained you from the guilt of bloodshed and from taking revenge with your own hand, now let your enemies and those who seek to do evil to my lord be as Nabal. **<sup>27</sup>** And now let this gift that your servant has brought to my lord be given to the young men who follow my lord. **<sup>28</sup>** Please forgive the trespass of your servant, for the LORD will certainly make a lasting house for my lord, because my lord is fighting the battles of the LORD, and evil shall not be found in you all your days. **<sup>29</sup>** If men rise up to pursue you and to seek your life, the life of my lord shall be bound among the living with the LORD your God. And the lives of your enemies He shall sling out as from the hollow of a sling.

**<sup>30</sup>** And when the LORD has done to my lord according to all the good that He has spoken concerning you, and has appointed you prince over Israel, **<sup>31</sup>** then this will not be a stumbling block to you or a cause of guilt to my lord, either that you have shed blood without cause or that my lord has avenged himself. And when the LORD has dealt well with my lord, then remember your servant.”

**<sup>32</sup>** And David said to Abigail, “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who sent you this day to meet me. **<sup>33</sup>** Blessed be your discretion, and blessed be you, who have kept me this day from shedding blood and from taking revenge by my own hand. **<sup>34</sup>** For as surely as the LORD, the God of Israel, lives, who has restrained me from doing you harm, unless you had hurried and come to meet me, surely by morning there would not have been left to Nabal so much as one male.” **<sup>35</sup>** Then David received from her hand what she had brought him. And he said to her, “Go up in peace to your house. See, I have listened to your voice and have granted your request.”

**<sup>36</sup>** And Abigail came to Nabal, and at that time he was holding a feast in his house, like the feast of a king. And Nabal’s heart was merry within him, for he was very drunk. So she told him nothing at all until the morning light. **<sup>37</sup>** And in the morning, when the wine had gone out of Nabal, his wife told him what happened, and his heart died within him, and he became as a stone. **<sup>38</sup>** And about ten days later the LORD struck Nabal, and he died.

**<sup>39</sup>** And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, “Blessed be the LORD, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal and has kept back His servant from evil. The LORD has returned the evil of Nabal on his own head.” Then David sent a message to Abigail, to take her as his wife. **<sup>40</sup>** And when the servants of David came to Abigail at Carmel, they said to her, “David has sent us to you to take you to him as his wife.” **<sup>41</sup>** And she rose and bowed with her face to the ground and said, “Behold, your servant is a handmaid to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.” **<sup>42</sup>** And Abigail hurried and rose and rode on a donkey, with five of her maidens who attended her. And she followed the messengers of David and became his wife.

**<sup>43</sup>** David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel, and both of them became his wives. **<sup>44</sup>** Now Saul had given Michal his daughter, David’s wife, to Palti the son of Laish, who was from Gallim. 

## Chapter 26

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the Ziphites came to Saul at Gibeah, saying, “Is not David hiding himself on the hill of Hachilah, which is opposite Jeshimon?” **<sup>2</sup>** So Saul rose and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, with three thousand chosen men of Israel, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph. **<sup>3</sup>** And Saul encamped on the hill of Hachilah, which is opposite Jeshimon, beside the road. But David was staying in the wilderness. When he saw that Saul had come after him into the wilderness, **<sup>4</sup>** David sent out spies and learned that Saul had indeed come.

**<sup>5</sup>** Then David arose and came to the place where Saul had encamped, and David saw the place where Saul lay, and Abner son of Ner, the commander of his army. Saul was lying in the encampment, and the people were encamped around him. **<sup>6</sup>** Then David said to Ahimelech the Hittite and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother of Joab, “Who will go down with me into the camp to Saul?” Abishai said, “I will go down with you.” **<sup>7</sup>** So David and Abishai came to the people by night, and there lay Saul sleeping inside the camp, with his spear stuck in the ground at his head, and Abner and the people lay around him. **<sup>8</sup>** Then Abishai said to David, “God has delivered your enemy into your hand this day. Now, please let me strike him with the spear to the ground with one stroke; I will not strike him twice.” **<sup>9</sup>** But David said to Abishai, “Do not destroy him. For who can stretch out his hand against the LORD’s anointed and be guiltless?” **<sup>10</sup>** And David said, “As the LORD lives, the LORD will strike him down, or his day will come to die, or he will go down into battle and perish. **<sup>11</sup>** The LORD forbid that I should stretch out my hand against the LORD’s anointed. But now take the spear that is at his head and the jar of water, and let us go.” **<sup>12</sup>** So David took the spear and the jar of water from beside Saul’s head, and they went away. No man saw it or knew it, nor did any awake, for they were all asleep, because a deep sleep from the LORD had fallen upon them.

**<sup>13</sup>** Then David crossed over to the other side and stood on the top of the hill far off, with a great space between them. **<sup>14</sup>** And David called to the people and to Abner son of Ner, saying, “Will you not answer, Abner?” And Abner answered, “Who are you who calls to the king?” **<sup>15</sup>** David said to Abner, “Are you not a man? And who is like you in Israel? Why then have you not kept watch over your lord the king? For one of the people came in to destroy your lord the king. **<sup>16</sup>** This thing that you have done is not good. As the LORD lives, you deserve to die, because you have not kept watch over your master, the LORD’s anointed. Now see where the king’s spear is and the jar of water that was at his head.”

**<sup>17</sup>** Then Saul recognized David’s voice and said, “Is this your voice, my son David?” And David said, “It is my voice, my lord the king.” **<sup>18</sup>** And he said, “Why does my lord pursue his servant? For what have I done? What evil is in my hand? **<sup>19</sup>** Now therefore, please let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If it is the LORD who has stirred you up against me, let Him accept an offering. But if it is men, cursed are they before the LORD, for they have driven me out this day so that I may have no share in the inheritance of the LORD, saying, ‘Go, serve other gods.’ **<sup>20</sup>** Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the ground away from the presence of the LORD, for the king of Israel has come out to seek a single flea, just as one hunts a partridge in the mountains.”

**<sup>21</sup>** Then Saul said, “I have sinned. Return, my son David, for I will no longer harm you, because my life was precious in your eyes this day. Behold, I have acted foolishly and have made a serious mistake.” **<sup>22</sup>** David answered and said, “Here is the king’s spear. Let one of the young men come over and take it. **<sup>23</sup>** The LORD repays every man for his righteousness and his faithfulness, for the LORD gave you into my hand today, but I would not stretch out my hand against the LORD’s anointed. **<sup>24</sup>** Behold, as your life was highly valued in my eyes this day, so may my life be highly valued in the eyes of the LORD, and may He deliver me out of all tribulation.” **<sup>25</sup>** Then Saul said to David, “Blessed are you, my son David; you will both do great things and will also prevail.” So David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place. 

## Chapter 27

**<sup>1</sup>** David said in his heart, “Now I shall perish one day by the hand of Saul. There is nothing better for me than to escape to the land of the Philistines. Then Saul will give up searching for me in all the territory of Israel, and I will escape from his hand.” **<sup>2</sup>** So David arose and passed over, he and the six hundred men who were with him, to Achish son of Maoch, king of Gath. **<sup>3</sup>** And David lived with Achish at Gath, he and his men, each with his household, even David with his two wives—Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail the widow of Nabal of Carmel. **<sup>4</sup>** And when it was told Saul that David had fled to Gath, he no longer sought him.

**<sup>5</sup>** Then David said to Achish, “If I have found favor in your eyes, let a place be given to me in one of the country towns, that I may dwell there. Why should your servant dwell in the royal city with you?” **<sup>6</sup>** So that day Achish gave him Ziklag. Therefore Ziklag has belonged to the kings of Judah to this day. **<sup>7</sup>** And the number of days that David lived in the country of the Philistines was a year and four months.

**<sup>8</sup>** Now David and his men went up and raided the Geshurites and the Girzites and the Amalekites. For those were the inhabitants of the land from ancient times, as you go to Shur and as far as the land of Egypt. **<sup>9</sup>** And David struck the land and left neither man nor woman alive, but took the sheep and cattle and donkeys and camels and garments, and returned and came to Achish. **<sup>10</sup>** And Achish said, “Where have you made a raid today?” And David said, “Against the Negev of Judah,” or “Against the Negev of the Jerahmeelites,” or “Against the Negev of the Kenites.” **<sup>11</sup>** David left neither man nor woman alive to bring news to Gath, thinking, “Lest they tell about us and say, ‘This is what David did.’” Such was his custom all the days he lived in the country of the Philistines. **<sup>12</sup>** And Achish trusted David, saying, “He has surely made himself utterly hated by his people Israel; therefore he will be my servant forever.” 

## Chapter 28

**<sup>1</sup>** Now it happened in those days that the Philistines gathered their armies for war to fight against Israel. Achish said to David, “Know for certain that you will go out with me in the army, you and your men.” **<sup>2</sup>** David said to Achish, “Very well, you shall know what your servant can do.” Achish said to David, “Then I will make you my bodyguard permanently.”

**<sup>3</sup>** Now Samuel had died, and all Israel had mourned for him and buried him in Ramah, his own city. And Saul had removed the mediums and spiritists from the land. **<sup>4</sup>** The Philistines gathered and came and encamped at Shunem, and Saul gathered all Israel, and they encamped at Gilboa. **<sup>5</sup>** When Saul saw the army of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly. **<sup>6</sup>** And Saul inquired of the LORD, but the LORD did not answer him, either by dreams or by Urim or by prophets.

**<sup>7</sup>** Then Saul said to his servants, “Seek out for me a woman who is a medium, that I may go to her and inquire of her.” His servants said to him, “Behold, there is a woman who is a medium at En-dor.” **<sup>8</sup>** So Saul disguised himself and put on other garments and went, he and two men with him. And they came to the woman by night. And he said, “Please divine for me by a spirit, and bring up for me whomever I shall name to you.” **<sup>9</sup>** But the woman said to him, “Behold, you know what Saul has done, how he has cut off the mediums and the spiritists from the land. Why then are you laying a snare for my life, to bring about my death?” **<sup>10</sup>** But Saul swore to her by the LORD, saying, “As the LORD lives, no punishment shall come upon you for this thing.”

**<sup>11</sup>** Then the woman said, “Whom shall I bring up for you?” And he said, “Bring up Samuel for me.” **<sup>12</sup>** When the woman saw Samuel, she cried out with a loud voice. And the woman said to Saul, “Why have you deceived me? You are Saul!” **<sup>13</sup>** The king said to her, “Do not be afraid. What do you see?” And the woman said to Saul, “I see a spiritual being coming up out of the earth.” **<sup>14</sup>** He said to her, “What is his appearance?” And she said, “An old man is coming up, and he is wrapped in a robe.” And Saul knew that it was Samuel, and he bowed with his face to the ground and prostrated himself.

**<sup>15</sup>** Then Samuel said to Saul, “Why have you disturbed me by bringing me up?” Saul answered, “I am greatly distressed, for the Philistines are warring against me, and God has turned away from me and does not answer me anymore, either by prophets or by dreams. Therefore I have called you, to make known to me what I should do.” **<sup>16</sup>** Samuel said, “Why then do you ask me, since the LORD has turned from you and become your enemy? **<sup>17</sup>** The LORD has done to you as He spoke by me, for the LORD has torn the kingdom out of your hand and given it to your neighbor, David. **<sup>18</sup>** Because you did not obey the voice of the LORD and did not carry out His fierce wrath against Amalek, the LORD has done this thing to you this day. **<sup>19</sup>** Moreover, the LORD will give Israel along with you into the hand of the Philistines, and tomorrow you and your sons shall be with me. The LORD will give the army of Israel also into the hand of the Philistines.”

**<sup>20</sup>** Then Saul fell at once full length on the ground, filled with fear because of the words of Samuel. There was no strength in him, for he had eaten nothing all day and all night. **<sup>21</sup>** The woman came to Saul and saw that he was greatly terrified, and she said to him, “Behold, your servant has obeyed you. I have taken my life in my hands and listened to what you have said to me. **<sup>22</sup>** Now, therefore, please obey your servant. Let me set a morsel of bread before you, that you may eat and have strength when you go on your way.” **<sup>23</sup>** But he refused and said, “I will not eat.” But his servants, together with the woman, urged him, and he listened to their words. So he arose from the ground and sat on the bed.

**<sup>24</sup>** Now the woman had a fattened calf in the house, and she hurried and killed it. And she took flour and kneaded it and baked unleavened bread from it. **<sup>25</sup>** She brought it before Saul and his servants, and they ate. Then they rose and went away that night. 

## Chapter 29

**<sup>1</sup>** Now the Philistines gathered all their armies at Aphek, and Israel was encamped by the spring that is in Jezreel. **<sup>2</sup>** The lords of the Philistines were passing by with units of hundreds and thousands, and David and his men were passing by in the rear with Achish. **<sup>3</sup>** Then the commanders of the Philistines said, “What are these Hebrews doing here?” And Achish said to the commanders of the Philistines, “Is this not David, the servant of Saul king of Israel, who has been with me these many days or years? I have found no fault in him from the day he defected to me to this day.” **<sup>4</sup>** But the commanders of the Philistines were angry with him, and the commanders of the Philistines said to him, “Send the man back, that he may return to the place you have assigned him. He shall not go down with us to battle, lest he become an adversary to us during the battle. For what better way for this man to reconcile himself to his master, except with the heads of our men? **<sup>5</sup>** Is this not David, of whom they sing in dances, saying,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘Saul has struck down his thousands,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and David his ten of thousands’?”

**<sup>6</sup>** Then Achish called David and said to him, “As the LORD lives, you have been upright, and your going out and your coming in with me in the army is good in my sight. For I have not found evil in you from the day of your coming to me until this day. Nevertheless, the other leaders do not approve of you. **<sup>7</sup>** So return now and go in peace, that you may not displease the lords of the Philistines.”

**<sup>8</sup>** But David said to Achish, “What have I done? What have you found in your servant from the day I entered your service until now, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?” **<sup>9</sup>** Achish answered David and said, “I know that you are as pleasing in my sight as an angel of God. Nevertheless, the commanders of the Philistines have said, ‘He shall not go up with us to the battle.’ **<sup>10</sup>** Now then rise early in the morning with the servants of your lord who came with you, and as soon as you rise early in the morning and have light, depart.” **<sup>11</sup>** So David rose early, he and his men, to depart in the morning to return to the land of the Philistines. But the Philistines went up to Jezreel. 

## Chapter 30

**<sup>1</sup>** Now when David and his men came to Ziklag on the third day, the Amalekites had made a raid against the Negev and against Ziklag. They had struck Ziklag and burned it with fire, **<sup>2</sup>** and taken captive the women and all who were in it, both small and great. They killed no one, but carried them off and went on their way. **<sup>3</sup>** When David and his men came to the city, they found it burned with fire, and their wives and sons and daughters taken captive. **<sup>4</sup>** Then David and the men who were with him lifted up their voices and wept until they had no strength to weep. **<sup>5</sup>** David’s two wives also had been taken captive, Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail the widow of Nabal of Carmel. **<sup>6</sup>** And David was greatly distressed, for the men spoke of stoning him, because the soul of all the men was bitter, every man for his sons and daughters. But David strengthened himself in the LORD his God.

**<sup>7</sup>** David said to Abiathar the priest, the son of Ahimelech, “Bring me the ephod.” So Abiathar brought the ephod to David. **<sup>8</sup>** And David inquired of the LORD, “Shall I pursue after this band? Shall I overtake them?” He answered him, “Pursue, for you shall surely overtake and shall surely rescue.” **<sup>9</sup>** So David set out, he and the six hundred men who were with him, and they came to the brook Besor, where those who were left behind stayed. **<sup>10</sup>** But David pursued, he and four hundred men. Two hundred stayed behind, who were too exhausted to cross the brook Besor.

**<sup>11</sup>** They found an Egyptian in the open country and brought him to David. They gave him bread and he ate. They gave him water to drink, **<sup>12</sup>** and they gave him a piece of a cake of figs and two clusters of raisins. When he had eaten, his spirit revived, for he had eaten no bread and drunk no water for three days and three nights. **<sup>13</sup>** Then David said to him, “To whom do you belong? And where are you from?” He said, “I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite. My master left me behind because I fell sick three days ago. **<sup>14</sup>** We had made a raid against the Negev of the Cherethites and against that which belongs to Judah and against the Negev of Caleb, and we burned Ziklag with fire.” **<sup>15</sup>** And David said to him, “Will you take me down to these raiders?” And he said, “Swear to me by God that you will not kill me or deliver me into the hands of my master, and I will take you down to these raiders.”

**<sup>16</sup>** When he had taken him down, behold, they were spread abroad over all the land, eating and drinking and dancing because of all the great spoil they had taken from the land of the Philistines and from the land of Judah. **<sup>17</sup>** And David struck them down from twilight until the evening of the next day, and not a man of them escaped, except four hundred young men who mounted camels and fled. **<sup>18</sup>** David recovered all that the Amalekites had taken, and David rescued his two wives. **<sup>19</sup>** Nothing was missing, whether small or great, sons or daughters, spoil or anything that had been taken. David brought back everything. **<sup>20</sup>** David also captured all the flocks and herds, and the men drove the livestock before him and said, “This is David’s spoil.”

**<sup>21</sup>** Then David came to the two hundred men who had been too exhausted to follow David, and who had been left at the brook Besor. They went out to meet David and to meet the people who were with him. And when David came near to the people, he greeted them. **<sup>22</sup>** Then all the wicked and worthless men among those who had gone with David said, “Because they did not go with us, we will not give them any of the spoil that we have recovered, except that each may lead away his wife and children, and depart.” **<sup>23</sup>** But David said, “You shall not do so, my brothers, with what the LORD has given us. He has preserved us and given into our hand the raiders that came against us. **<sup>24</sup>** Who would listen to you in this matter? For as his share is who goes down into the battle, so shall his share be who stays by the baggage. They shall share alike.” **<sup>25</sup>** And from that day forward he made it a statute and a rule for Israel to this day.

**<sup>26</sup>** When David came to Ziklag, he sent part of the spoil to his friends, the elders of Judah, saying, “Here is a present for you from the spoil of the enemies of the LORD.” **<sup>27</sup>** It was for those in Bethel, in Ramoth of the Negev, in Jattir, **<sup>28</sup>** in Aroer, in Siphmoth, in Eshtemoa, **<sup>29</sup>** in Racal, in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, in the cities of the Kenites, **<sup>30</sup>** in Hormah, in Bor-ashan, in Athach, **<sup>31</sup>** in Hebron, and for all the places where David and his men had roamed. 

## Chapter 31

**<sup>1</sup>** Now the Philistines were fighting against Israel, and the men of Israel fled before the Philistines and fell slain on Mount Gilboa. **<sup>2</sup>** The Philistines overtook Saul and his sons, and the Philistines struck down Jonathan and Abinadab and Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul. **<sup>3</sup>** The battle pressed hard against Saul, and the archers found him, and he was badly wounded by the archers. **<sup>4</sup>** Then Saul said to his armor-bearer, “Draw your sword and kill me, so that these uncircumcised do not come and attack me and mistreat me.” But his armor-bearer would not, for he was very afraid. Therefore Saul took his own sword and fell upon it. **<sup>5</sup>** When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he also fell upon his sword and died with him. **<sup>6</sup>** So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armor-bearer, and all his men on the same day together.

**<sup>7</sup>** When the men of Israel who were on the other side of the valley and those beyond the Jordan saw that the men of Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons were dead, they abandoned their cities and fled, and the Philistines came and lived in them. **<sup>8</sup>** The next day, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gilboa. **<sup>9</sup>** They cut off his head and stripped off his armor and sent messengers throughout the land of the Philistines to proclaim the news in the houses of their idols and to the people. **<sup>10</sup>** They put his armor in the house of Ashtaroth, and they fastened his body to the wall of Beth-shan.

**<sup>11</sup>** But when the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul, **<sup>12</sup>** all the valiant men arose and went all night and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan. And they came to Jabesh and burned them there. **<sup>13</sup>** They took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk tree in Jabesh and fasted seven days. 