# The Second Book of Samuel

## Chapter 1

**<sup>1</sup>** Now, after the death of Saul, when David had returned from striking down the Amalekites, David remained in Ziklag for two days. **<sup>2</sup>** And on the third day, a man came from Saul's camp, with his clothes torn and dust on his head. And when he came to David, he fell to the ground and bowed. **<sup>3</sup>** Then David said to him, “Where have you come from?” And he said to him, “I have escaped from the camp of Israel.” **<sup>4</sup>** And David said to him, “Tell me how the battle went.” And he answered, “The people have fled from the battle, and also many of the people have fallen and are dead. Saul and Jonathan, his son, have also died.” **<sup>5</sup>** Then David said to the young man who told him, “How do you know that Saul and Jonathan, his son, are dead?” **<sup>6</sup>** And the young man who told him said, “By chance, I happened to be on Mount Gilboa, and I saw Saul leaning on his spear. And the chariots and the horsemen had overtaken him. **<sup>7</sup>** When he looked behind him, he saw me and called to me, and I said, ‘Here I am.’ **<sup>8</sup>** And he said to me, ‘Who are you?’ And I answered him, ‘I am an Amalekite.’ **<sup>9</sup>** And he said to me, ‘Stand over me and kill me, for I am in severe pain and agony, though my life still lingers in me.’ **<sup>10</sup>** So I stood over him and killed him, because I knew that he would not live much longer. And I took the crown that was on his head and the bracelet that was on his arm, and I have brought them here to my lord.”

**<sup>11</sup>** Then David took hold of his clothes and tore them, all the men who were with him did so as well. **<sup>12</sup>** And they mourned and wept and fasted until evening for Saul and for Jonathan, his son, and for the people of the LORD and for the house of Israel, because they had been killed in the battle.

**<sup>13</sup>** Then David said to the young man who told him, “Where are you from?” And he answered, “I am the son of a foreigner, an Amalekite.” **<sup>14</sup>** And David said to him, “How is it you were not afraid to stretch out your hand to kill the LORD’s anointed?” **<sup>15</sup>** Then David called one of the young men and said, “Go, strike him down.” And he struck him so that he died. **<sup>16</sup>** And David said to him, “Your blood be upon your own head, for your mouth has testified against you, saying, ‘I have killed the LORD’s anointed.’”

**<sup>17</sup>** Then David lamented over Saul and over Jonathan, his son. **<sup>18</sup>** And he commanded that the sons of Judah be taught the Song of the Bow; as it is written in the Book of Jashar:

**<sup>19</sup>** “Your glory, O Israel, is slain on your high places!<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;How the mighty have fallen!<br/>
**<sup>20</sup>** Tell it not in Gath,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Proclaim it not in the streets of Ashkelon,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lest the daughters of the uncircumcised gloat.

**<sup>21</sup>** O mountains of Gilboa,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Let there be no dew or rain upon you,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nor fields of offerings;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For there the shield of the mighty was defiled,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The shield of Saul, not anointed with oil.

**<sup>22</sup>** From the blood of the slain,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From the fat of the mighty,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The bow of Jonathan did not turn back,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And the sword of Saul did not return empty.

**<sup>23</sup>** Saul and Jonathan, beloved and pleasant in their lives,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And in their death they were not divided;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They were swifter than eagles,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They were stronger than lions.

**<sup>24</sup>** O daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Who clothed you in scarlet with luxury,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Who adorned your apparel with ornaments of gold.

**<sup>25</sup>** How the mighty have fallen<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the midst of the battle!<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jonathan lies slain on your high places.

**<sup>26</sup>** I am distressed for you, my brother Jonathan;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Very pleasant have you been to me;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Your love to me was extraordinary,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Surpassing the love of women.

**<sup>27</sup>** How the mighty have fallen,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And the weapons of war have perished!”<br/>


## Chapter 2

**<sup>1</sup>** After this, David inquired of the LORD, saying, “Shall I go up into one of the cities of Judah?” And the LORD said to him, “Go up.” Then David said, “To which shall I go up?” And He said, “To Hebron.” **<sup>2</sup>** So David went there, with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite. **<sup>3</sup>** And David brought up his men who were with him, each with his household, and they dwelt in the towns of Hebron. **<sup>4</sup>** And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, “The men of Jabesh-gilead buried Saul.” **<sup>5</sup>** So David sent messengers to the men of Jabesh-gilead and said to them, “Blessed are you of the LORD, because you have shown this kindness to your lord, to Saul, and have buried him. **<sup>6</sup>** Now may the LORD show kindness and truth to you, and I also will repay you this kindness, because you have done this thing. **<sup>7</sup>** Now therefore let your hands be strong and valiant, for your lord Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah has anointed me king over them.”

**<sup>8</sup>** But Abner son of Ner, commander of Saul’s army, took Ish-bosheth son of Saul and brought him over to Mahanaim. **<sup>9</sup>** And he made him king over Gilead and over the Ashurites and over Jezreel and over Ephraim and over Benjamin, even over all Israel. **<sup>10</sup>** Ish-bosheth son of Saul was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and he reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David. **<sup>11</sup>** And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.

**<sup>12</sup>** And Abner son of Ner and the servants of Ish-bosheth son of Saul went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon. **<sup>13</sup>** And Joab son of Zeruiah and the servants of David went out and met them by the pool of Gibeon. And they sat down on opposite sides of the pool. **<sup>14</sup>** And Abner said to Joab, “Let the young men arise and compete before us.” And Joab said, “Let them arise.” **<sup>15</sup>** Then they arose and passed over by number: twelve for Benjamin and for Ish-bosheth son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David. **<sup>16</sup>** And each caught his opponent by the head and thrust his sword into his opponent’s side, so they fell down together. Therefore that place was called the Field of Sharp Swords, which is in Gibeon. **<sup>17</sup>** And the battle was very severe that day: Abner and the men of Israel were beaten by David's army.

**<sup>18</sup>** The three sons of Zeruiah were present: Joab, Abishai, and Asahel. Now Asahel was a fast runner, like one of the gazelles in the field. **<sup>19</sup>** And Asahel pursued Abner, not turning to the right or to the left from following Abner. **<sup>20</sup>** Then Abner looked behind him and said, “Is that you, Asahel?” And he answered, “It is I.” **<sup>21</sup>** And Abner said to him, “Turn aside to your right or to your left, and seize one of the other young men and take his armor.” But Asahel would not turn aside from following him. **<sup>22</sup>** So Abner said again to Asahel, “Turn aside from following me. Why should I strike you to the ground? How could I look your brother, Joab, in the eye?” **<sup>23</sup>** But he refused to turn aside; therefore Abner struck him with the butt of the spear in the belly, so that the spear came out behind him, and he fell there and died in that place. Everyone who came to the place where Asahel had fallen and died stood still.

**<sup>24</sup>** But Joab and Abishai pursued Abner. And the sun was going down when they came to the hill of Ammah, which is before Giah on the way to the wilderness of Gibeon. **<sup>25</sup>** And the sons of Benjamin gathered themselves together behind Abner and formed one band and stood on the top of a hill. **<sup>26</sup>** Then Abner called out to Joab and said, “Shall the sword devour forever? Do you not know that the end will be bitter? How long will it be before you tell the people to turn back from pursuing their brothers?” **<sup>27</sup>** And Joab said, “As God lives, if you had not spoken, surely the people would have continued until the morning, each attacking his brother.” **<sup>28</sup>** So Joab blew the trumpet, and all the people stopped pursuing Israel, and they discontinued the fight.

**<sup>29</sup>** Then Abner and his men went through the Arabah all that night, and they crossed the Jordan and walked all morning, until arriving in Mahanaim. **<sup>30</sup>** And Joab returned from following Abner, and when he had gathered all the people together, they counted nineteen men, plus Asahel as missing from David's army. **<sup>31</sup>** But the soldiers of David had struck down and killed three hundred and sixty men of Benjamin and of Abner’s men. **<sup>32</sup>** And they took Asahel and buried him in the tomb of his father, which is in Bethlehem. Then Joab and his men marched all night, arriving in Hebron at dawn. 

## Chapter 3

**<sup>1</sup>** There was a long war between the house of Saul and the house of David. But David grew stronger and stronger, while the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker.

**<sup>2</sup>** Sons were born to David at Hebron. His firstborn was Amnon, by Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; **<sup>3</sup>** and his second, Chileab, by Abigail the widow of Nabal of Carmel; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah, the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; **<sup>4</sup>** and the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital; **<sup>5</sup>** and the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah, David’s wife. These were born to David at Hebron.

**<sup>6</sup>** And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner was strengthening himself in the house of Saul. **<sup>7</sup>** Now Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah. And Ish-bosheth said to Abner, “Why have you gone in to my father’s concubine?” **<sup>8</sup>** Then Abner became very angry over the words of Ish-bosheth and said, “Am I a dog’s head of Judah? To this day I have shown loyalty to the house of Saul your father, to his brothers, and to his friends, and have not given you into the hand of David, and yet you accuse me today with a matter concerning this woman? **<sup>9</sup>** May God do so to Abner and more also, if I do not accomplish for David what the LORD has sworn to him: **<sup>10</sup>** to transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan to Beersheba!” **<sup>11</sup>** And he could not answer Abner another word, because he feared him.

**<sup>12</sup>** Then Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, “To whom does the land belong? Make your covenant with me, and my hand shall be with you to bring all Israel to your side.” **<sup>13</sup>** And he said, “Agreed. I will make a covenant with you, but I will require this one thing of you: You shall not see my face unless you first bring Michal, the daughter of Saul, when you come to see my face.” **<sup>14</sup>** Then David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth, Saul’s son, saying, “Give me my wife Michal, whom I betrothed to myself for a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.” **<sup>15</sup>** So Ish-bosheth sent and took her from her husband, from Paltiel the son of Laish. **<sup>16</sup>** But her husband went with her, weeping as he went, and followed her as far as Bahurim. Then Abner said to him, “Go, return.” And he returned.

**<sup>17</sup>** Now Abner held counsel with the elders of Israel, saying, “In times past you sought David to be king over you. **<sup>18</sup>** Now then, make it happen, for the LORD has spoken concerning David, saying, ‘By the hand of My servant David I will save My people Israel from the hand of the Philistines and from the hand of all their enemies.’” **<sup>19</sup>** Abner also spoke in the hearing of Benjamin, and Abner went also to speak in the hearing of David at Hebron all that seemed good to Israel and to the whole house of Benjamin.

**<sup>20</sup>** So Abner came to David at Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made a feast for Abner and the men who were with him. **<sup>21</sup>** Then Abner said to David, “I will arise and go and gather all Israel to my lord the king, so that they may make a covenant with you and that you may reign over all that your soul desires.” So David sent Abner away, and he went in peace.

**<sup>22</sup>** Just then the servants of David arrived with Joab from a raid, bringing much spoil with them. But Abner was not with David at Hebron, for he had sent him away, and he had gone in peace. **<sup>23</sup>** When Joab and all the army that was with him arrived, they told Joab, “Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he has sent him away, and he has gone in peace.” **<sup>24</sup>** Then Joab went to the king and said, “What have you done? Did Abner come to you? Why is it that you have sent him away so that he is gone? **<sup>25</sup>** You know that Abner the son of Ner came to deceive you, to know your going out and your coming in and to know all that you are doing.”

**<sup>26</sup>** When Joab came out from David, he sent messengers after Abner, and they brought him back from the cistern of Sirah. But David did not know it. **<sup>27</sup>** And when Abner returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside into the midst of the gate to speak with him privately, and there he struck him in the belly so that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother. **<sup>28</sup>** When David afterward heard of it, he said, “I and my kingdom are forever guiltless before the LORD for the blood of Abner the son of Ner. **<sup>29</sup>** Let it fall upon the head of Joab and upon all his father's house. And may there never fail from the house of Joab one who has a discharge or who is a leper or who walks with a staff or who falls by the sword or who lacks bread.” **<sup>30</sup>** So Joab and Abishai, his brother, killed Abner because he had killed their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.

**<sup>31</sup>** Then David said to Joab and to all the people who were with him, “Tear your clothes and put on sackcloth, and mourn before Abner.” And King David followed the bier. **<sup>32</sup>** They buried Abner at Hebron. And the king lifted up his voice and wept at the grave of Abner, and all the people wept. **<sup>33</sup>** And the king lamented over Abner and said, “Should Abner die as a fool dies? **<sup>34</sup>** Your hands were not bound; your feet were not put in fetters; as a man falls before wicked men, so you fell.” And all the people wept again over him. **<sup>35</sup>** Then all the people came to persuade David to eat food while it was still day, but David swore, saying, “May God do so to me and more also, if I taste bread or anything else until the sun goes down!”

**<sup>36</sup>** And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them, as everything the king did pleased all the people. **<sup>37</sup>** So all the people and all Israel understood that day that it had not been the king’s will to kill Abner the son of Ner. **<sup>38</sup>** And the king said to his servants, “Do you not know that a prince and a great man has fallen this day in Israel? **<sup>39</sup>** And I am this day weak, though anointed king. These sons of Zeruiah are too harsh for me. May the LORD repay the evildoer according to his wickedness.” 

## Chapter 4

**<sup>1</sup>** When Ish-bosheth, Saul’s son, heard that Abner had died at Hebron, his hands grew weak, and all Israel was dismayed. **<sup>2</sup>** Now Saul’s son had two men who were captains of raiding bands; their names were Baanah and Rechab, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the tribe of Benjamin—for Beeroth also is counted as part of Benjamin, **<sup>3</sup>** though the Beerothites fled to Gittaim and have lived there as foreigners to this day.

**<sup>4</sup>** Now Jonathan, Saul’s son, had a son who was lame in both feet. He was five years old when the report of Saul and Jonathan came from Jezreel, and his nurse picked him up and fled. And as she fled in haste, he fell and became lame. His name was Mephibosheth.

**<sup>5</sup>** Then the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went and came at the heat of the day to the house of Ish-bosheth, as he was lying on his bed at noon.

**<sup>6</sup>** They came into the middle of the house as if to get wheat, and they struck him in the belly. Then Rechab and Baanah, his brother, escaped. **<sup>7</sup>** When they came into the house, as he lay on his bed in his bedroom, they struck him and killed him and beheaded him. Then they took his head and traveled by the way of the Arabah all night. **<sup>8</sup>** And they brought the head of Ish-bosheth to David at Hebron and said to the king, “Behold, the head of Ish-bosheth, the son of Saul, your enemy, who sought your life. The LORD has avenged my lord the king this day on Saul and on his descendents.”

**<sup>9</sup>** But David answered Rechab and Baanah, his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said to them, “As the LORD lives, who has redeemed my life from every distress, **<sup>10</sup>** when one told me, ‘Behold, Saul is dead,’ thinking he was bringing good news, I seized him and killed him at Ziklag—which was the reward I gave him for his news. **<sup>11</sup>** How much more when wicked men have killed a righteous man in his own house on his bed? Now shall I not require his blood at your hand and destroy you from the earth?” **<sup>12</sup>** And David commanded his young men, and they killed them and cut off their hands and feet and hanged them beside the pool at Hebron. But they took the head of Ish-bosheth and buried it in the tomb of Abner at Hebron. 

## Chapter 5

**<sup>1</sup>** Then all the tribes of Israel came to David at Hebron and said, “Behold, we are your bone and your flesh. **<sup>2</sup>** In times past, when Saul was king over us, it was you who led out and brought in Israel. And the LORD said to you, ‘You shall shepherd My people Israel, and you shall be prince over Israel.’” **<sup>3</sup>** So all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, and King David made a covenant with them at Hebron before the LORD. And they anointed David king over Israel. **<sup>4</sup>** David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years. **<sup>5</sup>** At Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months, and at Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah.

**<sup>6</sup>** Then the king and his men went to Jerusalem against the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land. They said to David, “You shall not come in here, but the blind and the lame will turn you away”—thinking, “David cannot come in here.” **<sup>7</sup>** Nevertheless, David captured the stronghold of Zion—that is, the city of David.

**<sup>8</sup>** And David said on that day, “Whoever would strike the Jebusites, let him go up through the water shaft to attack the lame and the blind, who are hated by David’s soul.” Therefore it is said, “The blind and the lame shall not come into the house.” **<sup>9</sup>** So David lived in the stronghold and called it the city of David. And David built all around from the Millo and inward. **<sup>10</sup>** David became greater and greater, and the LORD God of hosts was with him.

**<sup>11</sup>** Then Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar trees, and carpenters and masons, and they built a house for David. **<sup>12</sup>** And David knew that the LORD had established him as king over Israel, and that He had exalted his kingdom for the sake of His people Israel.

**<sup>13</sup>** David took more concubines and wives from Jerusalem after he had come from Hebron, and more sons and daughters were born to David. **<sup>14</sup>** These are the names of those who were born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, **<sup>15</sup>** Ibhar, Elishua, Nepheg, Japhia, **<sup>16</sup>** Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet.

**<sup>17</sup>** When the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek out David. But David heard of it and went down to the stronghold. **<sup>18</sup>** Now the Philistines had come and spread out in the valley of Rephaim. **<sup>19</sup>** So David inquired of the LORD, saying, “Shall I go up against the Philistines? Will You give them into my hand?” And the LORD said to David, “Go up, for I will certainly give the Philistines into your hand.” **<sup>20</sup>** So David came to Baal-perazim, and there he defeated them there. And he said, “The LORD has broken through my enemies before me like the breakthrough of waters.” Therefore he named that place Baal-perazim. **<sup>21</sup>** And they left their idols there, and David and his men carried them away.

**<sup>22</sup>** Then the Philistines came up once again and spread themselves out in the valley of Rephaim. **<sup>23</sup>** When David inquired of the LORD, He said, “You shall not go up; circle around behind them and come against them opposite the balsam trees. **<sup>24</sup>** And it shall be, when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, then you shall act quickly, for then the LORD will have gone out before you to strike the army of the Philistines.” **<sup>25</sup>** So David did as the LORD had commanded him, and he struck down the Philistines from Geba as far as Gezer. 

## Chapter 6

**<sup>1</sup>** David again gathered all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand. **<sup>2</sup>** And David arose and went with all the people who were with him from Baale-judah to bring up from there the ark of God, which is called by the name of the LORD of hosts who is enthroned above the cherubim. **<sup>3</sup>** They set the ark of God on a new cart and brought it out of the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill. Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, were driving the new cart. **<sup>4</sup>** They brought it out of the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill, with the ark of God, and Ahio was walking in front of the ark. **<sup>5</sup>** David and all the house of Israel were celebrating before the LORD with all kinds of instruments made of fir wood, with lyres, harps, tambourines, castanets, and cymbals.

**<sup>6</sup>** When they came to the threshing floor of Nacon, Uzzah reached out toward the ark of God and took hold of it, because the oxen stumbled. **<sup>7</sup>** And the anger of the LORD burned against Uzzah, and God struck him there for the irreverence, and he died there beside the ark of God.

**<sup>8</sup>** David was angry because the LORD had broken out against Uzzah, and that place is called Perez-uzzah to this day. **<sup>9</sup>** So David was afraid of the LORD that day, and he said, “How can the ark of the LORD come to me?”

**<sup>10</sup>** David was not willing to bring the ark of the LORD to himself in the city of David. Instead, David took it aside to the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. **<sup>11</sup>** The ark of the LORD remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite for three months, and the LORD blessed Obed-edom and all his household.

**<sup>12</sup>** It was reported to King David, saying, “The LORD has blessed the house of Obed-edom and all that belongs to him because of the ark of God.” So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom to the city of David with joy. **<sup>13</sup>** When those who bore the ark of the LORD had gone six steps, he sacrificed an ox and a fattened animal.

**<sup>14</sup>** David was dancing before the LORD with all his might, and David was wearing a linen ephod. **<sup>15</sup>** So David and all the house of Israel were bringing up the ark of the LORD with shouting and with the sound of the trumpet.

**<sup>16</sup>** Now it happened, as the ark of the LORD came into the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out through the window and saw King David leaping and dancing before the LORD; and she despised him in her heart. **<sup>17</sup>** They brought in the ark of the LORD and set it in its place inside the tent that David had pitched for it, and David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD. **<sup>18</sup>** When David had finished offering the burnt offerings and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of hosts. **<sup>19</sup>** He distributed to all the people, to the whole multitude of Israel, both to men and women, a cake of bread, a portion of meat, and a raisin cake to each one. Then all the people departed, each to his house.

**<sup>20</sup>** David returned to bless his household. But Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David and said, “How the king of Israel distinguished himself today, uncovering himself today in the sight of the servant-maids of his servants, as one of the vulgar fellows shamelessly uncovers himself!” **<sup>21</sup>** So David said to Michal, “It was before the LORD, who chose me above your father and above all his house, to appoint me ruler over the people of the LORD, over Israel. Therefore I will celebrate before the LORD. **<sup>22</sup>** I will be more lightly esteemed than this and will humble myself in my own eyes, but with the servant-maids of whom you have spoken, with them I will be honored.” **<sup>23</sup>** And Michal the daughter of Saul had no child to the day of her death. 

## Chapter 7

**<sup>1</sup>** Now when the king lived in his house, and the LORD had given him rest from all his enemies around him, **<sup>2</sup>** the king said to Nathan the prophet, “Consider this: I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwells in a tent.” **<sup>3</sup>** And Nathan said to the king, “Go, do all that is in your heart, for the LORD is with you.”

**<sup>4</sup>** But that night the word of the LORD came to Nathan, saying, **<sup>5</sup>** “Go and say to My servant David, ‘Thus says the LORD: Would you build Me a house for Me to dwell in? **<sup>6</sup>** For I have not lived in a house since the day I brought up the sons of Israel from Egypt to this day, but I have been moving about in a tent for My dwelling. **<sup>7</sup>** In all the places where I have moved with all the sons of Israel, did I speak a word with any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to shepherd My people Israel, saying, “Why have you not built Me a house of cedar?”’”

**<sup>8</sup>** Therefore, this is what you shall say to My servant David, ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts: I took you from the pasture, from following the sheep, to be ruler over My people, over Israel. **<sup>9</sup>** And I have been with you wherever you went and have cut off all your enemies from before you. And I will make for you a great name, like the name of the great ones who are on the earth. **<sup>10</sup>** And I will appoint a place for My people Israel and will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place and not be disturbed anymore. And violent men shall afflict them no more, as formerly, **<sup>11</sup>** even from the day that I commanded judges over My people Israel. And I will give you rest from all your enemies. Moreover, the LORD declares to you that the LORD will make you a house. **<sup>12</sup>** When your days are fulfilled and you lie down with your fathers, I will raise up your offspring after you, who shall come forth from your body, and I will establish his kingdom. **<sup>13</sup>** He shall build a house for My name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever. **<sup>14</sup>** I will be to him a father, and he shall be to Me a son. When he commits iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men and with the stripes of the sons of men; **<sup>15</sup>** but My steadfast love shall not depart from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before you. **<sup>16</sup>** And your house and your kingdom shall be made sure forever before Me. Your throne shall be established forever.’” **<sup>17</sup>** Nathan spoke to David in accordance with all these words and in accordance with the entire vision.

**<sup>18</sup>** Then King David went in and sat before the LORD and said, “Who am I, O Lord GOD, and what is my house, that You have brought me this far? **<sup>19</sup>** And yet this was a small thing in Your eyes, O Lord GOD. You have spoken also of Your servant’s house for a great while to come, and this is instruction for mankind, O Lord GOD! **<sup>20</sup>** And what more can David say to You? For You know Your servant, O Lord GOD! **<sup>21</sup>** Because of Your word and according to Your own heart, You have done all this greatness, to make Your servant know it. **<sup>22</sup>** Therefore You are great, O LORD God! For there is none like You, and there is no God besides You, according to all that we have heard with our ears. **<sup>23</sup>** And who is like Your people Israel, the one nation on the earth whom God went to redeem to be His people, to make a name for Himself, and to do for them great and awesome things by driving out nations and their gods before Your people, whom You redeemed for Yourself from Egypt?

**<sup>24</sup>** And You established for Yourself Your people Israel to be Your people forever. And You, O LORD, became their God. **<sup>25</sup>** And now, O LORD God, confirm forever the word that You have spoken concerning Your servant and concerning his house, and do as You have spoken. **<sup>26</sup>** And Your name shall be magnified forever, saying, ‘The LORD of hosts is God over Israel,’ and the house of Your servant David shall be established before You. **<sup>27</sup>** For You, O LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, have revealed this to Your servant, saying, ‘I will build you a house.’ Therefore Your servant has found courage to pray this prayer to You. **<sup>28</sup>** And now, O Lord GOD, You are God, and Your words are true, and You have promised this good thing to Your servant. **<sup>29</sup>** Now therefore may it please You to bless the house of Your servant, that it may continue forever before You. For You, O Lord GOD, have spoken, and with Your blessing shall the house of Your servant be blessed forever.” 

## Chapter 8

**<sup>1</sup>** After this David struck down the Philistines and subdued them, and David took Metheg-ammah from the hand of the Philistines.

**<sup>2</sup>** And he struck down Moab, and measured them with a line, making them lie down on the ground. Two lines he measured to be put to death, and one full line to be spared. And the Moabites became servants to David, bringing tribute.

**<sup>3</sup>** David also struck down Hadadezer the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to restore his power at the Euphrates River. **<sup>4</sup>** And David took from him 1,700 horsemen and 20,000 foot soldiers. And David hamstrung all the chariot horses but left enough of them for a hundred chariots. **<sup>5</sup>** And the Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer, king of Zobah, but David struck down 22,000 men of the Arameans. **<sup>6</sup>** Then David put garrisons in Aram of Damascus, and the Arameans became servants to David, bringing tribute. And the LORD gave victory to David wherever he went. **<sup>7</sup>** And David took the shields of gold that were carried by the servants of Hadadezer and brought them to Jerusalem. **<sup>8</sup>** And from Betah and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, King David took a large amount of bronze.

**<sup>9</sup>** When Toi king of Hamath heard that David had struck down all the army of Hadadezer, **<sup>10</sup>** then Toi sent his son Joram to King David, to greet him and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer and defeated him—for Hadadezer had been at war with Toi. And Joram brought with him articles of silver, of gold, and of bronze. **<sup>11</sup>** These also King David dedicated to the LORD, together with the silver and gold that he dedicated from all the nations he subdued: **<sup>12</sup>** from Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, Amalek, and from the spoil of Hadadezer son of Rehob, king of Zobah.

**<sup>13</sup>** And David made a name for himself when he returned from striking down 18,000 Edomites in the Valley of Salt. **<sup>14</sup>** And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom he put garrisons, and all the Edomites became David’s servants. And the LORD gave victory to David wherever he went.

**<sup>15</sup>** So David reigned over all Israel, and David administered justice and righteousness to all his people. **<sup>16</sup>** Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the army; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder; **<sup>17</sup>** and Zadok the son of Ahitub and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar were priests; and Seraiah was secretary; **<sup>18</sup>** and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David’s sons were priests. 

## Chapter 9

**<sup>1</sup>** Then David said, “Is there still anyone left of the house of Saul, that I may show him kindness for Jonathan’s sake?” **<sup>2</sup>** A servant of the house of Saul named Ziba was there, and they called him to David. And the king said to him, “Are you Ziba?” And he said, “I am your servant.” **<sup>3</sup>** The king said, “Is there someone of the house of Saul still living, that I may show the kindness of God to him?” And Ziba said to the king, “A son of Jonathan still lives and he is crippled in his feet.” **<sup>4</sup>** The king said to him, “Where is he?” And Ziba said to the king, “He is in the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, at Lo-debar.” **<sup>5</sup>** Then King David sent for him and had him brought from the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, at Lo-debar.

**<sup>6</sup>** And Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, came to David and fell on his face and paid homage. And David said, “Mephibosheth!” And he answered, “Behold, I am your servant.” **<sup>7</sup>** And David said to him, “Do not be afraid, for I will surely show you kindness for the sake of your father Jonathan, and I will restore to you all the land of Saul your grandfather, and you shall always eat at my table.” **<sup>8</sup>** And he paid homage and said, “What is your servant, that you should look upon a dead dog such as I?”

**<sup>9</sup>** Then the king called Ziba, Saul’s servant, and said to him, “All that belonged to Saul and to all his house I have given to your master’s grandson. **<sup>10</sup>** And you shall till the land for him, you and your sons and your servants, and you shall bring in the harvest, that your master’s grandson may have food to eat. But Mephibosheth, your master’s grandson, shall always eat at my table.” Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants. **<sup>11</sup>** Then Ziba said to the king, “According to all that my lord the king commands to his servant, so will your servant do.” So Mephibosheth ate at David’s table like one of the king’s sons. **<sup>12</sup>** And Mephibosheth had a young son whose name was Mica. And all who lived in Ziba’s house became Mephibosheth’s servants. **<sup>13</sup>** So Mephibosheth lived in Jerusalem, for he always ate at the king’s table. Now he was lame in both his feet. 

## Chapter 10

**<sup>1</sup>** After this, the king of the Ammonites died, and Hanun his son reigned in his place. **<sup>2</sup>** And David said, “I will show kindness to Hanun the son of Nahash, just as his father showed kindness to me.” So David sent by the hand of his servants to comfort him concerning his father. But when David’s servants came into the land of the Ammonites, **<sup>3</sup>** the princes of the Ammonites said to Hanun their lord, “Do you think that David is honoring your father, in that he has sent comforters to you? Hasn't David sent his servants to you in order to search the city, to spy it out, and to overthrow it?” **<sup>4</sup>** So Hanun took David’s servants and shaved off half of each man’s beard, and cut off their garments in the middle at the hips, and sent them away. **<sup>5</sup>** When they told David, he sent to meet them, for the men were very embarrassed. And the king said, “Stay at Jericho until your beards have grown, and then return.”

**<sup>6</sup>** When the Ammonites saw that they had become odious to David, the Ammonites sent and hired the Arameans of Beth-rehob and the Arameans of Zobah, twenty thousand foot soldiers, and the king of Maacah with one thousand men, and the men of Tob, twelve thousand men. **<sup>7</sup>** When David heard of it, he sent Joab and all the host of mighty men. **<sup>8</sup>** And the Ammonites came out and drew up in battle formation at the entrance of the gate, and the Arameans of Zobah and of Rehob and the men of Tob and Maacah were by themselves in the open country.

**<sup>9</sup>** When Joab saw that the battle line was set against him both in front and in the rear, he chose some of the best of Israel and set them in array against the Arameans. **<sup>10</sup>** The rest of the troops he put in the hand of Abishai, his brother, and he set them in array against the Ammonites. **<sup>11</sup>** And he said, “If the Arameans are too strong for me, then you shall help me, but if the Ammonites are too strong for you, then I will come to help you. **<sup>12</sup>** But be strong, and let us show ourselves courageous for the sake of our people and for the cities of our God, and may the LORD do what seems good in His sight.”

**<sup>13</sup>** So Joab and the people who were with him drew near to battle against the Arameans, and they fled before him. **<sup>14</sup>** And when the Ammonites saw that the Arameans had fled, they also ran away before Abishai and entered the city. Then Joab returned from fighting against the Ammonites and returned to Jerusalem.

**<sup>15</sup>** But when the Arameans saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they regrouped. **<sup>16</sup>** And Hadadezer sent and brought out the Arameans who were beyond the River, and they came to Helam, with Shobach the commander of the army of Hadadezer leading them. **<sup>17</sup>** When David was informed about this, he gathered all Israel and crossed the Jordan and came to Helam. And the Arameans set themselves in array against David and fought with him. **<sup>18</sup>** But the Arameans fled before Israel, and David killed of the Arameans, the men of seven hundred chariots and forty thousand horsemen, and he struck down Shobach the commander of their army, who died there. **<sup>19</sup>** And when all the kings who were servants of Hadadezer saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they made peace with Israel and served them. So the Arameans were afraid to help the Ammonites anymore. 

## Chapter 11

**<sup>1</sup>** And it came to pass at the turn of the year, at the time when kings go out to war, that David sent Joab and his servants with him and all Israel, and they ravaged the Ammonites and besieged Rabbah. But David remained in Jerusalem.

**<sup>2</sup>** And it came to pass in the evening that David rose from his bed and walked about on the roof of the king’s house. From the roof he saw a woman bathing, and the woman was very beautiful in appearance. **<sup>3</sup>** So David sent and inquired about the woman. And one said, “Is this not Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?” **<sup>4</sup>** Then David sent messengers and took her, and she came to him, and he lay with her (she had been purifying herself from her uncleanness). Then she returned to her house. **<sup>5</sup>** And the woman conceived, and she sent and told David, saying, “I am pregnant.”

**<sup>6</sup>** Then David sent to Joab, “Send me Uriah the Hittite.” So Joab sent Uriah to David. **<sup>7</sup>** When Uriah came to him, David asked about Joab’s welfare and the welfare of the people and the progress of the war. **<sup>8</sup>** Then David said to Uriah, “Go down to your house and wash your feet.” And Uriah went out from the king’s house, and a gift from the king followed him. **<sup>9</sup>** But Uriah slept at the entrance of the king’s house with all the servants of his lord and did not go down to his house. **<sup>10</sup>** When they told David, “Uriah did not go down to his house,” David said to Uriah, “Have you not come from a journey? Why did you not go down to your house?” **<sup>11</sup>** And Uriah said to David, “The ark and Israel and Judah are housed in tents, and my lord Joab and the servants of my lord are camping in the open field. Should I go to my house to eat, drink and lie with my wife? As you live, and as your soul lives, I will not do so.” **<sup>12</sup>** Then David said to Uriah, “Remain here today, tomorrow I will send you back.” So Uriah stayed in Jerusalem that day and the next. **<sup>13</sup>** Now David invited him, and he ate in his presence and drank, and he made him drunk. In the evening he went out to lie on his couch with the servants of his lord, but he did not go down to his house.

**<sup>14</sup>** And it came to pass in the morning that David wrote a letter to Joab and sent it by the hand of Uriah. **<sup>15</sup>** And he wrote in the letter, saying, “Place Uriah at the front of the fiercest battle, and then draw back from him, so that he may be struck down and die.”

**<sup>16</sup>** So as Joab besieged the city, he assigned Uriah to the place where he knew there were valiant men. **<sup>17</sup>** Then the men of the city came out and fought against Joab, and some of the servants of David fell, and Uriah the Hittite also died.

**<sup>18</sup>** Then Joab sent and reported to David all the events of the war. **<sup>19</sup>** And he instructed the messenger, saying, “When you have finished telling the events of the war to the king, **<sup>20</sup>** and if it happens that the king’s wrath rises, and he says to you, ‘Why did you go so near the city to fight? Did you not know they would shoot from the wall? **<sup>21</sup>** Who struck Abimelek, the son of Jerubbesheth? Didn’t a woman throw an upper millstone on him from the wall, so that he died at Thebez? Why did you go so near the wall?’—then you shall say, ‘Your servant Uriah the Hittite is also dead.’”

**<sup>22</sup>** So the messenger went and came and reported to David all that Joab had sent him to tell. **<sup>23</sup>** And the messenger said to David, “The men prevailed against us and came out to us in the field, but we drove them back to the entrance of the gate. **<sup>24</sup>** Then the archers shot at your servants from the wall, and some of the king’s servants died. Your servant Uriah the Hittite also died.”

**<sup>25</sup>** Then David said to the messenger, “Thus you shall say to Joab: ‘Do not let this matter trouble you, for the sword devours one as well as another. Strengthen your battle against the city and overthrow it.’ And encourage him.”

**<sup>26</sup>** When the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she mourned for her husband. **<sup>27</sup>** And when the mourning was over, David sent and brought her to his house, and she became his wife and bore him a son. But what David had done was evil in the LORD’s sight. 

## Chapter 12

**<sup>1</sup>** Then the LORD sent Nathan who went to David and said, “There were two men in one city, one rich and the other poor. **<sup>2</sup>** The rich man had very many flocks and herds, **<sup>3</sup>** but the poor man had nothing except one little ewe lamb that he had bought. He nourished it, and it grew up with him and with his children. It ate his food, drank from his cup, and lay in his bosom—it was like a daughter to him. **<sup>4</sup>** Now a traveler came to the rich man, but he was unwilling to take from his own flock or herd to prepare for the guest who had come to him. Instead, he took the poor man’s ewe lamb and prepared it for the man who had come to him.”

**<sup>5</sup>** Then David became very angry at the man, and said to Nathan, “As the LORD lives, the man who did this deserves to die. **<sup>6</sup>** For his actions and because he had no pity, he must repay fourfold for the lamb.” **<sup>7</sup>** Then Nathan said to David, “You are that man! Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘I anointed you king over Israel, and I delivered you from the hand of Saul. **<sup>8</sup>** I gave you your master’s house and your master’s wives into your bosom. I gave you the house of Israel and Judah, and if that had been too little, I would have added to you much more. **<sup>9</sup>** Why have you despised the word of the LORD, to do what is evil in His sight? You struck down Uriah the Hittite with the sword—killing him with the sword of the Ammonites—then you took his wife for yourself. **<sup>10</sup>** Now therefore the sword shall never depart from your house, because you have despised Me and taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be your wife.’ **<sup>11</sup>** Thus says the LORD: ‘Behold, I will raise up evil against you from your own house. And before your very eyes, I will take your wives and give them to your companion, who will lie with your wives in broad daylight. **<sup>12</sup>** For you did this in secret, but I will do it before all Israel and in public.’”

**<sup>13</sup>** Then David said to Nathan, “I have sinned against the LORD.” And Nathan said to David, “The LORD also has put away your sin; you shall not die. **<sup>14</sup>** However, because you have given great occasion to the enemies of the LORD to blaspheme, on account of your actions, the child that is born to you shall surely die.” **<sup>15</sup>** Then Nathan went to his house.

And the LORD struck the child that Uriah’s wife bore to David, and it became very sick.**<sup>16</sup>** Therefore, David appealed to God for the child, fasting and laying all night on the ground. **<sup>17</sup>** The elders of his house stood beside him to raise him from the ground, but he would not, nor would he eat food with them. **<sup>18</sup>** On the seventh day the child died. The servants of David were afraid to tell him that the child was dead, for they said, “Look, while the child was alive, we spoke to him, and he would not listen to our voice. How then can we say to him, ‘The child is dead’? He might do something harmful.”

**<sup>19</sup>** But when David saw that his servants were whispering together, he perceived that the child had died. So David said to his servants, “Is the child dead?” And they said, “He is dead.” **<sup>20</sup>** Then David rose from the ground, washed and anointed himself, changed his clothes, and came into the house of the LORD and worshiped. Then he went to his own house. When he asked, they set food before him, and he ate.

**<sup>21</sup>** Then his servants said to him, “What is this thing that you have done? You fasted and wept for the child while he was alive, but when the child died, you arose and ate food.” **<sup>22</sup>** He said, “While the child was still alive, I fasted and wept, for I said, ‘Who knows? The LORD may be gracious to me, that the child may live.’ **<sup>23</sup>** But now he is dead; why should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I will go to him, but he will not return to me.”

**<sup>24</sup>** Then David comforted Bathsheba his wife and went in to her and lay with her, and she bore a son, and he called his name Solomon. And the LORD loved him, **<sup>25</sup>** and He sent a message by the hand of Nathan the prophet. So he called his name Jedidiah, because of the LORD.

**<sup>26</sup>** Now Joab fought against Rabbah of the Ammonites and took the royal city. **<sup>27</sup>** Then Joab sent messengers to David and said, “I have fought against Rabbah and have taken the city of waters. **<sup>28</sup>** Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, encamp against the city, and capture it, lest I capture the city and call it by my own name.” **<sup>29</sup>** So David gathered all the people, went to Rabbah, fought against it, and captured it. **<sup>30</sup>** Then he took the crown of their king from his head—its weight was a talent of gold, and in it was a precious stone—and it was placed on David’s head. He also brought out the spoil of the city in great abundance. **<sup>31</sup>** He brought out the people who were in it and put them to work with saws, iron picks, and axes, and he made them work in the brick kilns. He treated all the cities of the Ammonites in the same manner. Then David and all the people returned to Jerusalem. 

## Chapter 13

**<sup>1</sup>** Now it came about after this that Absalom the son of David had a beautiful sister named Tamar, and Amnon the son of David loved her. **<sup>2</sup>** Amnon was so distressed over his sister Tamar that he made himself ill, for she was a virgin, and it seemed impossible for Amnon to do anything to her. **<sup>3</sup>** But Amnon had a friend whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, David’s brother. And Jonadab was a very crafty man. **<sup>4</sup>** He said to him, “Why are you, the king’s son, so dejected morning after morning? Will you not tell me?” Then Amnon said to him, “I love Tamar, the sister of my brother Absalom.” **<sup>5</sup>** Jonadab said to him, “Lie down on your bed and pretend to be ill. When your father comes to see you, say to him, ‘Please let my sister Tamar come and give me something to eat, and prepare the food in my sight, so that I may see it and eat from her hand.’”

**<sup>6</sup>** So Amnon lay down and pretended to be ill. When the king came to see him, Amnon said to the king, “Please let my sister Tamar come and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat from her hand.” **<sup>7</sup>** Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, “Go now to your brother Amnon’s house and prepare food for him.” **<sup>8</sup>** So Tamar went to her brother Amnon’s house, and he was lying down. She took dough, kneaded it, made cakes in his sight, and baked the cakes. **<sup>9</sup>** She took the pan and poured them out before him, but he refused to eat. Then Amnon said, “Have everyone leave me.” So everyone left him. **<sup>10</sup>** Then Amnon said to Tamar, “Bring the food into the bedroom, so I may eat from your hand.” So Tamar took the cakes she had made and brought them into the bedroom to her brother Amnon.

**<sup>11</sup>** When she brought them near for him to eat, he grabbed her and said to her, “Come, lie with me, my sister.” **<sup>12</sup>** But she answered him, “No, my brother, do not violate me, for such a thing is not done in Israel; do not do this disgraceful thing! **<sup>13</sup>** And I—where could I take my reproach? And you—you would be like one of the fools in Israel. Now please speak to the king, for he will not withhold me from you.” **<sup>14</sup>** But he refused to listen to her, and being stronger, he violated her and lay with her.

**<sup>15</sup>** Then Amnon hated her immensely, so much so, that the hatred with which he hated her was greater than the love with which he had loved her. And Amnon said to her, “Get up, get out!” **<sup>16</sup>** But she said to him, “No, because the wrong in sending me away is greater than the other that you did to me.” But he would not listen to her. **<sup>17</sup>** Then he called his young servant who attended him and said, “Put this woman out of my presence and bolt the door after her.” **<sup>18</sup>** Now she was wearing a long robe with sleeves, for thus were the virgin daughters of the king clothed in earlier times. So his servant put her out and bolted the door after her. **<sup>19</sup>** Tamar put ashes on her head, tore the long robe she was wearing, laid her hand on her head, and went away, crying aloud as she went.

**<sup>20</sup>** Her brother Absalom said to her, “Has Amnon your brother been with you? But now, my sister, be quiet. He is your brother. Do not take this matter to heart.” So Tamar lived, a desolate woman, in her brother Absalom’s house. **<sup>21</sup>** When King David heard about all these things, he was very angry. **<sup>22</sup>** But Absalom did not speak with Amnon either good or bad, because Absalom hated Amnon for violating his sister, Tamar.

**<sup>23</sup>** Two years later, Absalom had sheepshearers in Baal-hazor, which is near Ephraim, and Absalom invited all the king’s sons. **<sup>24</sup>** Absalom came to the king and said, “Your servant has sheepshearers. Please let the king and his servants go with your servant.” **<sup>25</sup>** But the king said to Absalom, “No, my son, let us not all go, lest we be a burden to you.” Though he urged him, he would not go, but gave him his blessing. **<sup>26</sup>** Then Absalom said, “If not you, rhen please let my brother Amnon go with us.” The king said to him, “Why should he go with you?” **<sup>27</sup>** But Absalom urged him, so he let Amnon and all the king’s sons go with him.

**<sup>28</sup>** Absalom commanded his servants, “Watch now, when Amnon’s heart is merry with wine, and when I say to you, ‘Strike Amnon,’ then kill him. Do not be afraid. Have I not commanded you? Be strong and be valiant.” **<sup>29</sup>** The servants of Absalom did to Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king’s sons rose and each mounted his mule and fled.

**<sup>30</sup>** While they were on the way, a report came to David, “Absalom has struck down all the king’s sons, and not one of them is left.” **<sup>31</sup>** The king arose, tore his garments, and lay on the ground, and all his servants standing by tore their garments. **<sup>32</sup>** But Jonadab the son of Shimeah, David’s brother, said, “Let not my lord suppose that they have killed all the young men, the king’s sons, for only Amnon is dead. For by Absalom’s command this has been determined from the day he violated his sister Tamar. **<sup>33</sup>** So now, let not my lord the king take the matter to heart, thinking all the king’s sons are dead, for Amnon alone is dead.”

**<sup>34</sup>** But Absalom fled. Now the watchman lifted his eyes and looked, and saw many people were coming from the road behind him by the side of the mountain. **<sup>35</sup>** Jonadab said to the king, “See! The king’s sons have come. As your servant said, so it has happened.” **<sup>36</sup>** As he finished speaking, the king’s sons came and lifted up their voices and wept. The king also and all his servants wept very bitterly.

**<sup>37</sup>** But Absalom fled and went to Talmai the son of Ammihud, king of Geshur. David mourned for his son day after day. **<sup>38</sup>** So Absalom fled and went to Geshur, and he was there for three years. **<sup>39</sup>** And the spirit of the king longed to go out to Absalom, for he was comforted concerning Amnon, since he was dead. 

## Chapter 14

**<sup>1</sup>** Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king’s heart was toward Absalom. **<sup>2</sup>** So Joab sent to Tekoa and brought a wise woman from there. He said to her, “Please pretend to be in mourning and put on mourning garments. Do not anoint yourself with oil, but act like a woman who has been mourning many days for the dead. **<sup>3</sup>** Then go in to the king and speak to him in this way.” So Joab put the words in her mouth.

**<sup>4</sup>** When the woman of Tekoa spoke to the king, she fell on her face to the ground and prostrated herself and said, “Help, O king!”

**<sup>5</sup>** The king said to her, “What troubles you?” And she said, “Indeed, I am a widow; my husband is dead. **<sup>6</sup>** And your maidservant had two sons. And the two of them fought in the field, and there was no one to separate them, and one struck the other and killed him. **<sup>7</sup>** And now the whole clan has risen up against your maidservant, and they say, ‘Deliver him who struck his brother, that we may put him to death for the life of his brother whom he killed.’ So they would destroy the heir also. Thus they would quench my coal which is left and leave to my husband neither name nor remnant on the face of the earth.”

**<sup>8</sup>** Then the king said to the woman, “Go to your house, and I will give orders concerning you.”

**<sup>9</sup>** And the woman of Tekoa said to the king, “My lord the king, let the iniquity be on me and on my father’s house, and the king and his throne be guiltless.”

**<sup>10</sup>** And the king said, “If anyone says anything to you, bring him to me, and he will not touch you anymore.”

**<sup>11</sup>** Then she said, “Please let the king remember the LORD your God, so that the avenger of blood may not destroy anymore, lest they destroy my son.” And he said, “As the LORD lives, not one hair of your son shall fall to the ground.” **<sup>12</sup>** Then the woman said, “Please let your maidservant speak a word to my lord the king.” And he said, “Speak.” **<sup>13</sup>** And the woman said, “Why then have you planned such a thing against the people of God? For in speaking this word the king is as one who is guilty, in that the king does not bring back his banished one. **<sup>14</sup>** For we must die, and are like water spilled on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again. But God does not take away life; rather, he devises plans so that the banished one may not remain cast out. **<sup>15</sup>** And now I have come to speak this thing to my lord the king, because the people have made me afraid. And your maidservant said, ‘Let me now speak to the king; perhaps the king will perform the request of his maidservant. **<sup>16</sup>** For the king will hear and deliver his maidservant from the hand of the man who would destroy me and my son together from the inheritance of God.’ **<sup>17</sup>** Then your maidservant said, ‘May the word of my lord the king bring rest.’ For as the angel of God, so is my lord the king to discern good and evil. And may the LORD your God be with you.”

**<sup>18</sup>** Then the king answered and said to the woman, “Do not hide from me anything that I ask you.” And the woman said, “Let my lord the king speak.”

**<sup>19</sup>** And the king said, “Is the hand of Joab with you in all this?” And the woman answered and said, “As your soul lives, my lord the king, no one can turn to the right or to the left from anything that my lord the king has spoken. For your servant Joab commanded me, and he put all these words in the mouth of your maidservant. **<sup>20</sup>** In order to change the appearance of the matter your servant Joab has done this thing. But my lord is wise, as wise as the angel of God, to know all that is in the earth.”

**<sup>21</sup>** Then the king said to Joab, “Behold now, I have done this thing. Go therefore, bring back the young man Absalom.”

**<sup>22</sup>** And Joab fell to the ground on his face and bowed himself and blessed the king. And Joab said, “Today your servant knows that I have found favor in your sight, my lord the king, because the king has done the word of his servant.”

**<sup>23</sup>** So Joab arose and went to Geshur and brought Absalom to Jerusalem. **<sup>24</sup>** But the king said, “Let him turn to his own house, and let him not see my face.” So Absalom returned to his own house and did not see the king’s face.

**<sup>25</sup>** Now in all Israel there was no man praised as much for his beauty as Absalom; from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him. **<sup>26</sup>** And when he cut the hair of his head (for at the end of every year he cut it, because it was heavy on him, so he cut it), he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels by the royal weight. **<sup>27</sup>** And to Absalom were born three sons and one daughter whose name was Tamar. She was a woman of beautiful appearance. **<sup>28</sup>** So Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem, but he did not see the king’s face. **<sup>29</sup>** Then Absalom sent for Joab to send him to the king, but he would not come to him. So he sent again a second time, but he would not come. **<sup>30</sup>** Therefore he said to his servants, “See, Joab’s field is next to mine, and he has barley there. Go and set it on fire.” So Absalom’s servants set the field on fire. **<sup>31</sup>** Then Joab arose and came to Absalom at his house and said to him, “Why have your servants set my field on fire?” **<sup>32</sup>** And Absalom said to Joab, “Look, I sent to you, saying, ‘Come here, so that I may send you to the king to say, “Why have I come from Geshur? It would have been better for me to still be there.”’ Now therefore, let me see the king’s face. And if there is guilt in me, let him put me to death.” **<sup>33</sup>** So Joab went to the king and told him. And he called for Absalom, and he came to the king and bowed himself on his face to the ground before the king. And the king kissed Absalom. 

## Chapter 15

**<sup>1</sup>** After this, Absalom prepared for himself a chariot and horses, and fifty men to run before him. **<sup>2</sup>** Absalom used to rise early and stand beside the way to the gate. Whenever any man had a dispute to come before the king for judgment, Absalom would call to him and say, “From what city are you?” And he would say, “Your servant is from one of the tribes of Israel.” **<sup>3</sup>** Then Absalom would say to him, “Look, your claims are good and right, but there is no one assigned by the king to hear you.” **<sup>4</sup>** And Absalom would say, “Oh that I were judge in the land! Then every man with a dispute or cause could come to me, and I would give him justice.”

**<sup>5</sup>** And whenever a man came near to pay homage to him, he would put out his hand and take hold of him and kiss him. **<sup>6</sup>** Absalom did this to all the Israelites who came to the king for judgment. So Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel. **<sup>7</sup>** At the end of four years, Absalom said to the king, “Please let me go and pay my vow that I have vowed to the LORD in Hebron. **<sup>8</sup>** For your servant vowed a vow while I lived at Geshur in Aram, saying, ‘If the LORD will indeed bring me back to Jerusalem, then I will worship the LORD in Hebron.’” **<sup>9</sup>** The king said to him, “Go in peace.” So he arose and went to Hebron.

**<sup>10</sup>** But Absalom sent secret messengers throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, “As soon as you hear the sound of the trumpet, then say, ‘Absalom is king in Hebron!’” **<sup>11</sup>** With Absalom went two hundred men from Jerusalem who were invited guests, and they went in their innocence, knowing nothing. **<sup>12</sup>** And while Absalom was offering the sacrifices, he sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s counselor, from his city, from Giloh. And the conspiracy grew strong, and the people with Absalom kept increasing.

**<sup>13</sup>** A messenger came to David, saying, “The hearts of the men of Israel have gone after Absalom.” **<sup>14</sup>** Then David said to all his servants who were with him at Jerusalem, “Arise, and let us flee, or else none of us will escape from Absalom. Go quickly, lest he overtake us quickly and bring down disaster on us and strike the city with the edge of the sword.” **<sup>15</sup>** The king’s servants said to the king, “Behold, your servants are ready to do whatever my lord the king chooses.” **<sup>16</sup>** So the king went out, and all his household after him. But the king left ten concubines to keep the house.

**<sup>17</sup>** And the king went out, and all the people after him. They halted at the last house. **<sup>18</sup>** And all his servants passed by him, and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the six hundred Gittites who had followed him from Gath passed on before the king. **<sup>19</sup>** Then the king said to Ittai the Gittite, “Why do you also go with us? Return and stay with the king, for you are a foreigner and also an exile from your home. **<sup>20</sup>** You came only yesterday, and shall I today make you wander about with us, since I go where I must go? Return, and take back your brothers with you, and may the LORD show steadfast love and faithfulness to you.”

**<sup>21</sup>** But Ittai answered the king, “As the LORD lives, and as my lord the king lives, wherever my lord the king shall be, whether for death or for life, there also will your servant be.” **<sup>22</sup>** David said to Ittai, “Go then, pass on.” So Ittai the Gittite passed on with all his men and all the little ones who were with him. **<sup>23</sup>** And all the land wept aloud as all the people passed by, and the king crossed the brook Kidron, and all the people passed on toward the way of the wilderness. **<sup>24</sup>** And behold, Zadok also came, and all the Levites with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God. And they set down the ark of God, until all the people had finished passing out of the city. **<sup>25</sup>** Then the king said to Zadok, “Carry the ark of God back into the city. If I find favor in the eyes of the LORD, he will bring me back and let me see both it and his dwelling place. **<sup>26</sup>** But if he says, ‘I have no delight in you,’ behold, here I am; let him do to me what seems good to him.”

**<sup>27</sup>** The king also said to Zadok the priest, “Are you not a seer? Return to the city in peace, you and Abiathar with your two sons, Ahimaaz your son and Jonathan the son of Abiathar. **<sup>28</sup>** See, I will wait at the fords of the wilderness until word comes from you to inform me.”

**<sup>29</sup>** So Zadok and Abiathar carried the ark of God back to Jerusalem, and they remained there. **<sup>30</sup>** But David went up the ascent of the Mount of Olives, weeping as he went, barefoot and with his head covered. And all the people who were with him covered their heads, and they went up, weeping as they went. **<sup>31</sup>** And it was told David, “Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom.” And David said, “O LORD, please turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.” **<sup>32</sup>** When David came to the summit, where God was worshiped, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his coat torn and dirt on his head. **<sup>33</sup>** David said to him, “If you go on with me, you will be a burden to me. **<sup>34</sup>** But if you return to the city and say to Absalom, ‘I will be your servant, O king; as I have been your father’s servant in time past, so now I will be your servant,’ then you will defeat the counsel of Ahithophel for me. **<sup>35</sup>** Are not Zadok and Abiathar the priests with you there? So whatever you hear from the king’s house, tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests. **<sup>36</sup>** Behold, their two sons are with them there, Ahimaaz, Zadok’s son, and Jonathan, Abiathar’s son. By them you shall send to me everything you hear.” **<sup>37</sup>** So Hushai, David’s friend, came into the city, just as Absalom was entering Jerusalem. 

## Chapter 16

**<sup>1</sup>** When David had passed a little beyond the summit, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him with a couple of saddled donkeys, and on them two hundred loaves of bread, a hundred clusters of raisins, a hundred cakes of figs, and a skin of wine. **<sup>2</sup>** The king said to Ziba, “Why have you brought these?” Ziba said, “The donkeys are for the king’s household to ride on, the bread and fruit are for the young men to eat, and the wine is for those who faint in the wilderness to drink.” **<sup>3</sup>** The king said, “And where is your master’s son?” Ziba said to the king, “Behold, he is staying in Jerusalem, for he said, ‘Today the house of Israel will give me back the kingdom of my father.’” **<sup>4</sup>** Then the king said to Ziba, “Behold, all that belonged to Mephibosheth is now yours.” Ziba said, “I pay homage; let me find favor in your sight, my lord the king.”

**<sup>5</sup>** When King David came to Bahurim, there came out a man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son of Gera, and he came out cursing continuously as he came. **<sup>6</sup>** He threw stones at David and at all the servants of King David. And all the people and all the mighty men were on his right and on his left. **<sup>7</sup>** Shimei said as he cursed, “Get out, get out, you man of blood, you worthless man! **<sup>8</sup>** The LORD has returned upon you all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose place you have reigned, and the LORD has given the kingdom into the hand of your son Absalom. See, your evil is upon you, for you are a man of blood.” **<sup>9</sup>** Then Abishai the son of Zeruiah said to the king, “Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over and take off his head.” **<sup>10</sup>** But the king said, “What have I to do with you, you sons of Zeruiah? If he curses, and if the LORD has told him, ‘Curse David,’ who then shall say, ‘Why have you done so?’” **<sup>11</sup>** David said to Abishai and to all his servants, “Behold, my own son seeks my life; how much more now may this Benjaminite! Leave him alone, and let him curse, for the LORD has told him to. **<sup>12</sup>** It may be that the LORD will look on my affliction, and that the LORD will repay me with good for his cursing today.” **<sup>13</sup>** So David and his men went on the road, while Shimei went along on the hillside opposite him and cursed as he went and threw stones at him and flung dust.

**<sup>14</sup>** The king and all the people who were with him arrived weary at the Jordan, and there he refreshed himself.

**<sup>15</sup>** Now Absalom and all the people, the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel was with him. **<sup>16</sup>** When Hushai the Archite, David’s friend, came to Absalom, Hushai said to Absalom, “Long live the king! Long live the king!” **<sup>17</sup>** Absalom said to Hushai, “Is this your loyalty to your friend? Why did you not go with your friend?” **<sup>18</sup>** Hushai said to Absalom, “No, for whomever the LORD and this people and all the men of Israel choose, his I will be, and with him I will remain. **<sup>19</sup>** Again, whom should I serve? Should it not be his son? As I have served your father, so I will serve you.”

**<sup>20</sup>** Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, “Give your counsel. What shall we do?” **<sup>21</sup>** Ahithophel said to Absalom, “Go in to your father’s concubines whom he has left to keep the house, and all Israel will hear that you have made yourself a stench to your father, and the hands of all who are with you will be strengthened.” **<sup>22</sup>** So they pitched a tent for Absalom on the roof, and Absalom went in to his father’s concubines in the sight of all Israel.

**<sup>23</sup>** Now in those days the counsel that Ahithophel gave was as if one consulted the word of God; so was all the counsel of Ahithophel esteemed, both by David and by Absalom. 

## Chapter 17

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Ahithophel said to Absalom, “Let me choose twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue David tonight. **<sup>2</sup>** I will come upon him while he is weary and weak, and I will startle him. All the people who are with him will flee, and I will strike down the king alone. **<sup>3</sup>** And I will bring all the people back to you as a bride returns to her husband. You seek the life of only one man, and all the people will be at peace.”

**<sup>4</sup>** The proposal pleased Absalom and all the elders of Israel. **<sup>5</sup>** Then Absalom said, “Call also Hushai the Archite, and let us hear what he has to say.” **<sup>6</sup>** When Hushai came to Absalom, Absalom said to him, “Ahithophel has spoken in this manner. Shall we do as he says? If not, speak.”

**<sup>7</sup>** Hushai said to Absalom, “The counsel that Ahithophel has given this time is not good.” **<sup>8</sup>** Hushai added, “You know your father and his men, that they are mighty men, and they are enraged in their minds like a bear robbed of her cubs in the field. And your father is a man of war; he will not spend the night with the people. **<sup>9</sup>** Even now he has hidden himself in one of the pits or in some other place. And when some of the men fall at the first attack, whoever hears of it will say, ‘There has been a slaughter among the people who follow Absalom.’ **<sup>10</sup>** Then even the most valiant, with the heart of a lion, will utterly melt, for all Israel knows that your father is a mighty man and those who are with him are valiant men. **<sup>11</sup>** Therefore I advise that all Israel be gathered to you, from Dan to Beersheba, as the sand by the sea in multitude, and that you yourself go into battle. **<sup>12</sup>** So shall we come upon him in whatever place he is found, and we shall fall on him as the dew falls on the ground. And of him and all the men with him not even one will be left. **<sup>13</sup>** If he withdraws into a city, then all Israel will bring ropes to that city, and we will drag it into the valley until not even a pebble can be found there.” **<sup>14</sup>** Then Absalom and all the men of Israel said, “The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel.” For the LORD had ordained to thwart the good counsel of Ahithophel so that the LORD might bring disaster upon Absalom.

**<sup>15</sup>** Then Hushai sent word to Zadok and Abiathar the priests, “This is how Ahithophel counseled Absalom and the elders of Israel, and this was how I have counseled. **<sup>16</sup>** Now therefore send quickly and tell David, saying, ‘Do not spend the night at the fords of the wilderness, but by all means cross over, lest the king and all the people with him be swallowed up.’”

**<sup>17</sup>** Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz were staying at En-rogel, and a servant girl used to go and tell them, and they would go and tell King David, for they could not risk being seen entering the city. **<sup>18</sup>** But a lad saw them and told Absalom. So the two of them quickly departed and came to the house of a man in Bahurim who had a well in his courtyard, and they went down into it. **<sup>19</sup>** And the woman spread a covering over the mouth of the well and scattered grain over it, and no one knew about it. **<sup>20</sup>** When Absalom’s servants came to the woman at the house and said, “Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan?” the woman said to them, “They have crossed over the brook.” And they searched but did not find them, so they returned to Jerusalem. **<sup>21</sup>** After they had gone, the men came up out of the well, and went and told King David. They said to David, “Arise and cross quickly over the water, for thus Ahithophel has counseled against you.” **<sup>22</sup>** Then David arose, and all the people who were with him, and they crossed the Jordan. By the morning light, not one of them was left who had not crossed the Jordan.

**<sup>23</sup>** When Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he saddled his donkey and arose and went to his home, to his city. He set his house in order and hanged himself. So he died and was buried in the tomb of his father.

**<sup>24</sup>** Then David came to Mahanaim, and Absalom crossed the Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him. **<sup>25</sup>** Absalom had appointed Amasa over the army in place of Joab. Amasa was the son of a man whose name was Ithra the Israelite, who had married Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister of Zeruiah, Joab’s mother. **<sup>26</sup>** And Israel and Absalom camped in the land of Gilead.

**<sup>27</sup>** When David came to Mahanaim, Shobi the son of Nahash from Rabbah of the Ammonites, and Machir the son of Ammiel from Lo-debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite from Rogelim, **<sup>28</sup>** brought beds, basins, earthen vessels, wheat, barley, flour, roasted grain, beans, lentils, **<sup>29</sup>** honey, curds, sheep, and cheese from the herd for David and the people who were with him to eat, for they said, “The people are hungry and weary and thirsty in the wilderness.” 

## Chapter 18

**<sup>1</sup>** Then David mustered the men who were with him, and he set over them commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds. **<sup>2</sup>** David sent out the army: one-third under Joab’s leadership, one-third under Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab’s brother, and one-third under Ittai the Gittite. And the king said to the people, “I will also go out with you myself.” **<sup>3</sup>** But the people said, “You shall not go out. For if we flee, they will not care about us, and if half of us die, they will not care about us. But you are worth ten thousand of us. Therefore it is better that you send us help from the city.” **<sup>4</sup>** The king said to them, “Whatever seems best in your eyes I will do.” So the king stood beside the gate while all the army went out by hundreds and by thousands.

**<sup>5</sup>** And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, “Deal gently for my sake with the young man Absalom.” And all the people heard when the king commanded all the commanders concerning Absalom. **<sup>6</sup>** So the army went out into the field against Israel, and the battle took place in the forest of Ephraim. **<sup>7</sup>** And the army of Israel was defeated there before the servants of David, and the slaughter there on that day was great—twenty thousand men. **<sup>8</sup>** The battle spread over the face of all the countryside, and the forest devoured more of the people that day than the sword devoured. **<sup>9</sup>** Absalom happened to meet the soldiers of David while riding on his mule, and the mule went under the thick branches of a great oak, and his head was caught in the oak branches, and he was left hanging between heaven and earth, while the mule that was under him kept going.

**<sup>10</sup>** A certain man saw it and told Joab, “Look, I saw Absalom hanging in an oak.” **<sup>11</sup>** Joab said to the man who told him, “You saw him? Why then did you not strike him to the ground there? I would have given you ten pieces of silver and a warrior’s belt.” **<sup>12</sup>** But the man said to Joab, “Even if I were to feel the weight of a thousand pieces of silver in my hand, I would not put out my hand against the king’s son. For in our hearing the king commanded you and Abishai and Ittai, saying, ‘Watch over the young man Absalom for me.’ **<sup>13</sup>** Otherwise, if I had dealt treacherously with his life—and there is nothing hidden from the king—you yourself would not have protected me.” **<sup>14</sup>** Then Joab said, “I will not wait like this with you.” So he took three javelins in his hand and thrust them into the heart of Absalom while he was still alive in the midst of the oak. **<sup>15</sup>** And ten young men, Joab’s armor-bearers, surrounded Absalom and struck him and killed him. **<sup>16</sup>** Then Joab blew the trumpet, and the army returned from pursuing Israel, for Joab restrained the people. **<sup>17</sup>** They took Absalom and threw him into a great pit in the forest and raised over him a very great heap of stones. And all Israel fled, each to his tent.

**<sup>18</sup>** Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and set up for himself a pillar, which is in the King’s Valley, for he said, “I have no son to preserve my name.” So he called the pillar by his own name, and it is called Absalom’s Monument to this day.

**<sup>19</sup>** Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said, “Let me run and carry the news to the king that the LORD has vindicated him from the hand of his enemies.” **<sup>20</sup>** But Joab said to him, “You shall not be the bearer of news today. You shall bear news another day, but today you shall bear no news, because the king’s son is dead.” **<sup>21</sup>** Then Joab said to a Cushite, “Go, tell the king what you have seen.” And the Cushite bowed before Joab and ran. **<sup>22</sup>** Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said again to Joab, “Whatever may come, let me also run after the Cushite.” Joab said, “Why will you run, my son, since you will have no reward for the news?” **<sup>23</sup>** “Whatever may come,” he said, “I will run.” So he said to him, “Run.” Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain and outran the Cushite.

**<sup>24</sup>** Now David was sitting between the two gates, and the watchman went up to the roof of the gate by the wall and lifted up his eyes and looked, and saw a man was running alone. **<sup>25</sup>** The watchman called out and told the king. The king said, “If he is alone, there is news in his mouth.” And he kept coming and drew nearer. **<sup>26</sup>** Then the watchman saw another man running. And the watchman called to the gatekeeper and said, “i see another man running alone.” The king said, “He also brings news.” **<sup>27</sup>** The watchman said, “I think the first is running like Ahimaaz the son of Zadok.” And the king said, “He is a good man and comes with good news.” **<sup>28</sup>** Then Ahimaaz called out to the king, “All is well.” And he bowed before the king with his face to the ground and said, “Blessed be the LORD your God, who has delivered up the men who lifted up their hand against my lord the king.”

**<sup>29</sup>** The king said, “Is it well with the young man Absalom?” Ahimaaz answered, “When Joab sent the king’s servant and me your servant, I saw a great tumult, but I do not know what it was.” **<sup>30</sup>** The king said, “Turn aside and stand here.” So he turned aside and stood still. **<sup>31</sup>** And then, the Cushite arrived and said, “Good news for my lord the king! For the LORD has vindicated you this day from the hand of all who rose up against you.” **<sup>32</sup>** The king said to the Cushite, “Is it well with the young man Absalom?” The Cushite answered, “May the enemies of my lord the king and all who rise up against you to do harm be like that young man.”

**<sup>33</sup>** Then the king was deeply shaken. He went up to the upper chamber over the gate and wept. As he went, he said, “O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! Would that I had died instead of you, O Absalom, my son, my son!” 

## Chapter 19

**<sup>1</sup>** And it was told to Joab, “Behold, the king is weeping and mourning for Absalom.” **<sup>2</sup>** And the victory on that day was turned into mourning for all the army, for the army heard it said that day, “The king is grieving for his son.” **<sup>3</sup>** And the people stole into the city that day, as people steal in, who are ashamed when they flee from a battle. **<sup>4</sup>** The king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice, “O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!”

**<sup>5</sup>** Then Joab came into the house to the king and said, “Today you have put to shame the faces of all your servants, who have today saved your life and the lives of your sons and daughters and the lives of your wives and your concubines, **<sup>6</sup>** by loving those who hate you and hating those who love you. For you have made it clear today that commanders and servants are nothing to you. For today I know that if Absalom were alive and all of us were dead today, then it would have pleased you well. **<sup>7</sup>** Now therefore arise, go out and speak kindly to your servants. For I swear by the LORD, if you do not go out, not a man will stay with you tonight. And this will be worse for you than all the evil that has come upon you from your youth until now.” **<sup>8</sup>** Then the king arose and sat in the gate. And all the people were told, “Behold, the king is sitting in the gate.” And all the people came before the king.

Now Israel had fled, every man to his tent.**<sup>9</sup>** And all the people were arguing throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, “The king delivered us from the hand of our enemies and saved us from the hand of the Philistines, and now he has fled out of the land because of Absalom. **<sup>10</sup>** But Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now therefore, why do you say nothing about bringing the king back?”

**<sup>11</sup>** And King David sent this message to Zadok and Abiathar the priests: “Say to the elders of Judah, ‘Why should you be the last to bring the king back to his house, when the word of all Israel has come to the king, to bring him to his house? **<sup>12</sup>** You are my brothers; you are my bone and my flesh. Why then should you be the last to bring back the king?’ **<sup>13</sup>** And say to Amasa, ‘Are you not my bone and my flesh? God do so to me and more also if you are not commander of the army before me always in place of Joab.’” **<sup>14</sup>** So he turned the heart of all the men of Judah as one man, so that they sent word to the king, “Return, both you and all your servants.” **<sup>15</sup>** So the king returned and came to the Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal to meet the king and to bring the king over the Jordan. **<sup>16</sup>** And Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjaminite from Bahurim, hurried and came down with the men of Judah to meet King David. **<sup>17</sup>** And with him were a thousand men from Benjamin. And Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, with his fifteen sons and his twenty servants, rushed down to the Jordan before the king, **<sup>18</sup>** and they crossed the ford to bring over the king’s household and to do what was good in his sight.

And Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king as he was about to cross the Jordan,**<sup>19</sup>** and he said to the king, “Let not my lord impute guilt to me, or remember what your servant did wrong on the day my lord the king left Jerusalem. Let not the king take it to heart. **<sup>20</sup>** For your servant knows that I have sinned. Therefore, behold, I have come this day, the first of all the house of Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king.” **<sup>21</sup>** Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered, “Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the LORD’s anointed?” **<sup>22</sup>** But David said, “What have I to do with you, you sons of Zeruiah, that you should this day be an adversary to me? Should any man be put to death in Israel this day? For do I not know that I am this day king over Israel?” **<sup>23</sup>** And the king said to Shimei, “You shall not die.” And the king gave him his oath.

**<sup>24</sup>** And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king. He had neither taken care of his feet nor trimmed his beard nor washed his clothes from the day the king departed until the day he came back in peace. **<sup>25</sup>** And when he came to Jerusalem to meet the king, the king said to him, “Why did you not go with me, Mephibosheth?” **<sup>26</sup>** He answered, “My lord, O king, my servant deceived me. For your servant said to him, ‘Saddle a donkey for me, that I may ride on it and go with the king,’ for your servant is lame. **<sup>27</sup>** He has slandered your servant to my lord the king. But my lord the king is like the angel of God; do therefore what seems good to you. **<sup>28</sup>** For all my father’s house were but dead men before my lord the king, yet you set your servant among those who eat at your table. What right then have I to cry any more to the king?” **<sup>29</sup>** And the king said to him, “Why speak any more of your affairs? I have decided: you and Ziba shall divide the land.” **<sup>30</sup>** And Mephibosheth said to the king, “Let him take it all, since my lord the king has come safely to his own house.”

**<sup>31</sup>** Now Barzillai the Gileadite had come down from Rogelim. He went on with the king to the Jordan to escort him over the Jordan. **<sup>32</sup>** Barzillai was a very old man, eighty years old. He had provided the king with food while he stayed at Mahanaim, for he was a very wealthy man. **<sup>33</sup>** The king said to Barzillai, “Come over with me, and I will provide for you with me in Jerusalem.” **<sup>34</sup>** But Barzillai said to the king, “How many years have I still to live, that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem? **<sup>35</sup>** I am this day eighty years old. Can I discern what is pleasant and what is not? Can your servant taste what he eats or what he drinks? Can I still listen to the voice of singing men and singing women? Why then should your servant be an added burden to my lord the king? **<sup>36</sup>** Your servant will go a little way over the Jordan with the king. Why should the king repay me with such a reward? **<sup>37</sup>** Please let your servant return, that I may die in my own city near the grave of my father and my mother. But here is your servant Chimham. Let him go over with my lord the king, and do for him whatever seems good to you.” **<sup>38</sup>** And the king answered, “Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do for him whatever seems good to you, and all that you desire of me I will do for you.”

**<sup>39</sup>** Then all the people went over the Jordan, and the king went over. And the king kissed Barzillai and blessed him, and he returned to his own place. **<sup>40</sup>** The king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him. All the people of Judah, and also half the people of Israel, brought the king on his way. **<sup>41</sup>** Then all the men of Israel came to the king and said to him, “Why have our brothers the men of Judah stolen you away and brought the king and his household over the Jordan, and all David’s men with him?” **<sup>42</sup>** All the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, “Because the king is our close relative. Why then are you angry over this matter? Have we eaten at all at the king’s expense? Or has he given us any gift?” **<sup>43</sup>** And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, “We have ten parts in the king, and in David also we have more than you. Why then did you despise us, that our advice was not first taken in bringing back our king?” But the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel. 

## Chapter 20

**<sup>1</sup>** Now there happened to be there a worthless man, whose name was Sheba the son of Bichri, a Benjaminite. And he blew the trumpet and said, “We have no portion in David, nor inheritance in the son of Jesse! Every man to his tents, O Israel!” **<sup>2</sup>** So all the men of Israel withdrew from following David and followed Sheba the son of Bichri. But the men of Judah remained steadfast to their king, from the Jordan even to Jerusalem. **<sup>3</sup>** Then David came to his house at Jerusalem. And the king took the ten concubines whom he had left to keep the house and put them in custody and provided for them, but did not go in to them. So they were shut up until the day of their death, living as widows.

**<sup>4</sup>** Then the king said to Amasa, “Call the men of Judah together to me within three days, and you be present here yourself.” **<sup>5</sup>** So Amasa went to summon Judah, but he delayed beyond the set time which he had appointed him. **<sup>6</sup>** And David said to Abishai, “Now Sheba the son of Bichri will do us more harm than Absalom. Take your lord’s servants and pursue him, lest he find for himself fortified cities and escape from our sight.” **<sup>7</sup>** And Joab’s men went out after him, along with the Cherethites and the Pelethites and all the mighty men. They went out from Jerusalem to pursue Sheba the son of Bichri. **<sup>8</sup>** When they were at the great stone that is in Gibeon, Amasa came to meet them. Now Joab was wearing a soldier’s garment, and over it was a belt with a sword fastened upon his loins in its sheath, and as he went forward, it fell out. **<sup>9</sup>** Joab said to Amasa, “Is it well with you, my brother?” And Joab took Amasa by the beard with his right hand to kiss him. **<sup>10</sup>** But Amasa did not guard himself against the sword that was in Joab’s hand. So he struck him in the belly and poured out his entrails to the ground without a second blow, and he died.

Then Joab and Abishai his brother pursued Sheba the son of Bichri.**<sup>11</sup>** And one of Joab’s young men stood by him and said, “Whoever favors Joab and whoever is for David, let him follow Joab.” **<sup>12</sup>** And Amasa lay wallowing in his blood in the highway. And when the man saw that all the people stopped, he carried Amasa from the highway into the field and threw a garment over him, because he saw that everyone who came by him stopped. **<sup>13</sup>** When he was removed from the highway, all the men passed on after Joab to pursue Sheba the son of Bichri. **<sup>14</sup>** And he passed through all the tribes of Israel to Abel of Beth-maacah, and all the Bichrites were assembled and also went after him. **<sup>15</sup>** And they came and besieged him in Abel of Beth-maacah, and they cast up a mound against the city, and it stood against the rampart. And all the troops who were with Joab battered the wall to throw it down.

**<sup>16</sup>** Then a wise woman called from the city, “Listen, listen! Say to Joab, ‘Come here, that I may speak to you.’” **<sup>17</sup>** He came near to her, and the woman said, “Are you Joab?” He answered, “I am.” Then she said to him, “Listen to the words of your servant.” And he answered, “I am listening.” **<sup>18</sup>** Then she said, “They used to say in former times, ‘Let them ask advice at Abel,’ and so they settled a matter. **<sup>19</sup>** I am one of those who are peaceable and faithful in Israel. You seek to destroy a city that is a mother in Israel. Why will you swallow up the heritage of the LORD?” **<sup>20</sup>** Joab answered, “Far be it from me, far be it, that I should swallow up or destroy! **<sup>21</sup>** That is not true. But a man of the hill country of Ephraim, named Sheba the son of Bichri, has lifted up his hand against King David. Give him up alone, and I will withdraw from the city.” And the woman said to Joab, “In that case, his head shall be thrown to you over the wall.”

**<sup>22</sup>** Then the woman in her wisdom went to all the people. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri and threw it to Joab. So he blew the trumpet, and they dispersed from the city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem to the king. **<sup>23</sup>** Now Joab was over all the army of Israel. And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites. **<sup>24</sup>** And Adoram was over the forced labor, and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was the recorder. **<sup>25</sup>** And Sheva was secretary, and Zadok and Abiathar were priests. **<sup>26</sup>** And Ira the Jairite was also priest to David. 

## Chapter 21

**<sup>1</sup>** Now there was a famine in the days of David for three years, year after year. And David sought the face of the LORD, and the LORD said, “It is because of Saul and his bloody house, for he put the Gibeonites to death.” **<sup>2</sup>** So the king called the Gibeonites and spoke to them. (Now the Gibeonites were not of the sons of Israel but of the remnant of the Amorites; and the sons of Israel had sworn to them, but Saul had sought to strike them down in his zeal for the sons of Israel and Judah.) **<sup>3</sup>** David said to the Gibeonites, “What shall I do for you? And how shall I make atonement, that you may bless the inheritance of the LORD?” **<sup>4</sup>** The Gibeonites said to him, “It is not a matter of silver or gold between us and Saul or his house, nor is it for us to put any man to death in Israel.” And he said, “What you say, I will do for you.” **<sup>5</sup>** Then they said to the king, “The man who consumed us and plotted against us so that we were destroyed from remaining in any of the borders of Israel— **<sup>6</sup>** let seven men of his sons be given to us, and we will hang them before the LORD in Gibeah of Saul, the chosen of the LORD.” And the king said, “I will give them.” **<sup>7</sup>** But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of the oath of the LORD that was between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul. **<sup>8</sup>** So the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bore to Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth, and the five sons of Merab the daughter of Saul, whom she bore to Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite. **<sup>9</sup>** And he gave them into the hand of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them on the mountain before the LORD. So the seven of them fell together. They were put to death in the days of harvest, at the beginning of barley harvest.

**<sup>10</sup>** Then Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth and spread it for herself on the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water poured on them from the sky, and she did not allow the birds of the heavens to rest on them by day or the beasts of the field by night. **<sup>11</sup>** When it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done, **<sup>12</sup>** David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh-gilead, who had stolen them from the open square of Beth-shan, where the Philistines had hanged them on the day the Philistines struck down Saul in Gilboa. **<sup>13</sup>** He brought up from there the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son, and they gathered the bones of those who had been hanged. **<sup>14</sup>** And they buried the bones of Saul and Jonathan, his son, in the land of Benjamin in Zela, in the tomb of Kish, his father. They did all that the king commanded, and afterward God responded to the plea for the land.

**<sup>15</sup>** Once again the Philistines made war with Israel. And David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines. And David grew weary. **<sup>16</sup>** Then Ishbi-benob, who was of the descendants of the giants, whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of bronze and who was girded with a new sword, thought to strike David down. **<sup>17</sup>** But Abishai the son of Zeruiah came to his aid and struck the Philistine and killed him. Then the men of David swore to him, saying, “You shall no longer go out with us to battle, so that you do not extinguish the lamp of Israel.”

**<sup>18</sup>** After this there was again war with the Philistines at Gob. Then Sibbecai the Hushathite struck down Saph, who was one of the descendants of the giants. **<sup>19</sup>** Again there was war with the Philistines at Gob, and Elhanan the son of Jaare-oregim the Bethlehemite struck down Goliath the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam. **<sup>20</sup>** There was again war at Gath, where there was a man of great stature who had six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot, twenty-four in number, and he also was descended from the giants. **<sup>21</sup>** And he defied Israel, but Jonathan the son of Shimei, David’s brother, struck him down. **<sup>22</sup>** These four were descended from the giants in Gath, and they fell by the hand of David and by the hand of his servants. 

## Chapter 22

**<sup>1</sup>** And David spoke to the LORD the words of this song on the day the LORD delivered him from the hand of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul. **<sup>2</sup>** He said, “The LORD is my rock and my fortress and my deliverer, **<sup>3</sup>** My God, my rock in whom I take refuge, my shield and the horn of my salvation, my stronghold and my refuge, my savior—You save me from violence. **<sup>4</sup>** I call upon the LORD, who is worthy to be praised, and I am saved from my enemies. **<sup>5</sup>** For the waves of death encompassed me; the torrents of destruction overwhelmed me;

**<sup>6</sup>** The cords of the grave surrounded me;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the snares of death confronted me.<br/>
**<sup>7</sup>** In my distress I called upon the LORD, and to my God I cried out.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From His temple He heard my voice, and my cry came to His ears.<br/>
**<sup>8</sup>** Then the earth shook and quaked;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the foundations of heaven trembled and were shaken,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;because He was angry.

**<sup>9</sup>** Smoke rose from His nostrils,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and devouring fire from His mouth;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;coals were kindled by it.<br/>
**<sup>10</sup>** He bowed the heavens and came down,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;with thick darkness under His feet.<br/>
**<sup>11</sup>** He rode upon a cherub and flew;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He was seen upon the wings of the wind.<br/>
**<sup>12</sup>** He made darkness a canopy around Him,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;gathering of waters, thick clouds of the skies.<br/>
**<sup>13</sup>** From the brightness before Him coals of fire were kindled. **<sup>14</sup>** The LORD thundered from heaven,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the Most High uttered His voice.<br/>
**<sup>15</sup>** He sent out arrows and scattered them,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lightning, and routed them.<br/>
**<sup>16</sup>** Then the channels of the sea were seen,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the foundations of the world were laid bare,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;by the rebuke of the LORD,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;at the blast of the breath of His nostrils.<br/>
**<sup>17</sup>** He sent from on high, He took me;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He drew me out of many waters.<br/>
**<sup>18</sup>** He rescued me from my strong enemy,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from those who hated me,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for they were too mighty for me.<br/>
**<sup>19</sup>** They confronted me in the day of my disaster,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but the LORD was my support.<br/>
**<sup>20</sup>** He brought me out into a broad place;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He rescued me, for He delighted in me.<br/>
**<sup>21</sup>** The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;according to the cleanness of my hands He repaid me.<br/>
**<sup>22</sup>** For I have kept the ways of the LORD<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and have not wickedly departed from my God.<br/>
**<sup>23</sup>** For all His rules were before me,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and His statutes I did not depart from.<br/>
**<sup>24</sup>** I was blameless before Him<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and kept myself from guilt.<br/>
**<sup>25</sup>** Therefore the LORD repaid me according to my righteousness,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;according to my cleanness in His sight.<br/>
**<sup>26</sup>** With the loyal You show Yourself loyal;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;with the blameless man You show Yourself blameless;<br/>
**<sup>27</sup>** With the pure You show Yourself pure,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but with the crooked You show Yourself astute.<br/>
**<sup>28</sup>** You save a humble people,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;but Your eyes are on the haughty to bring them down.<br/>
**<sup>29</sup>** For You are my lamp, O LORD,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the LORD illumines my darkness.<br/>
**<sup>30</sup>** For by You I run against a troop,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and by my God I leap over a wall.<br/>
**<sup>31</sup>** This God—His way is perfect;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the word of the LORD is proven;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He is a shield to all who take refuge in Him.<br/>
**<sup>32</sup>** For who is God but the LORD?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And who is a rock except our God?<br/>
**<sup>33</sup>** God is my strong fortress,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and He makes my way blameless.<br/>
**<sup>34</sup>** He makes my feet like the feet of a deer<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and sets me on my high places.<br/>
**<sup>35</sup>** He trains my hands for battle,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;so that my arms can bend a bow of bronze.<br/>
**<sup>36</sup>** You have given me the shield of Your salvation,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and Your gentleness has made me great.<br/>
**<sup>37</sup>** You enlarged my steps under me,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and my feet did not slip.<br/>
**<sup>38</sup>** I pursued my enemies and destroyed them,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and I did not turn back until they were consumed.<br/>
**<sup>39</sup>** I consumed them and crushed them so that they could not rise;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;they fell under my feet.<br/>
**<sup>40</sup>** For You girded me with strength for battle;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You subdued under me those who rose up against me.<br/>
**<sup>41</sup>** You made my enemies turn their backs to me—<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;those who hated me—and I destroyed them.<br/>
**<sup>42</sup>** They looked, but there was no one to save,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to the LORD, but He did not answer them.<br/>
**<sup>43</sup>** Then I pulverized them like the dust of the earth;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I crushed them and stamped them down like the mire of the streets.<br/>
**<sup>44</sup>** You delivered me from the strivings of my people;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You preserved me as the head of the nations;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a people whom I had not known served me.<br/>
**<sup>45</sup>** Foreigners came cringing to me;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;as soon as they heard, they obeyed me.<br/>
**<sup>46</sup>** Foreigners faded away<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and came trembling out of their fortresses.<br/>
**<sup>47</sup>** The LORD lives, and blessed be my rock,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and exalted be God, the rock of my salvation—<br/>
**<sup>48</sup>** the God who gave me vengeance<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and brought down peoples under me,<br/>
**<sup>49</sup>** who brought me out from my enemies;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You exalted me above those who rose against me;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You delivered me from the violent man.<br/>
**<sup>50</sup>** Therefore I will give thanks to You, O LORD,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;among the nations and will sing praises to Your name.<br/>
**<sup>51</sup>** He gives great salvation to His king<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and shows steadfast love to His anointed,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;to David and his seed forever.<br/>


## Chapter 23

**<sup>1</sup>** Now these are the last words of David:<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;David the son of Jesse declares,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the man raised on high declares,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the anointed of the God of Jacob,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the sweet psalmist of Israel:<br/>
**<sup>2</sup>** “The Spirit of the LORD spoke by me,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and His word was on my tongue.<br/>
**<sup>3</sup>** The God of Israel has spoken;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the Rock of Israel has said to me:<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘He who rules justly over men,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ruling in the fear of God,<br/>
**<sup>4</sup>** is like the light of morning when the sun rises,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a morning without clouds,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from the brightness after rain<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;that brings grass from the earth.’

**<sup>5</sup>** Truly, my house is not so with God,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;yet He has made with me an everlasting covenant,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ordered in all things and secure.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For will He not make it grow,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;my entire salvation and all my desire?<br/>
**<sup>6</sup>** But worthless men are all like thorns cast away,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for they cannot be taken with the hand;<br/>
**<sup>7</sup>** but the man who touches them<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;arms himself with iron and the shaft of a spear,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and they are utterly burned with fire in their place.”

**<sup>8</sup>** These are the names of the mighty men whom David had:<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Josheb-basshebeth a Tahchemonite, chief of the captains—<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;he wielded his spear against eight hundred whom he killed at one time.<br/>
**<sup>9</sup>** Next to him among the mighty men was Eleazar the son of Dodo, son of an Ahohite.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He was with David when they defied the Philistines who were gathered there for battle,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the men of Israel withdrew.<br/>
**<sup>10</sup>** He rose and struck the Philistines until his hand was weary and clung to the sword,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and the LORD brought about a great victory that day. The people returned after him only to strip the slain.<br/>
**<sup>11</sup>** Next to him was Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. The Philistines gathered at Lehi, where there was a plot of ground full of lentils, and the people fled from the Philistines. **<sup>12</sup>** But he took his stand in the midst of the plot and defended it, and struck down the Philistines, and the LORD worked a great victory. **<sup>13</sup>** And three of the thirty chief men went down and came to David at harvest time to the cave of Adullam, while a band of Philistines was encamped in the Valley of Rephaim. **<sup>14</sup>** David was then in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem. **<sup>15</sup>** David longed and said, “Oh that someone would give me water to drink from the well of Bethlehem that is by the gate!” **<sup>16</sup>** So the three mighty men broke through the camp of the Philistines and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem that was by the gate and carried it and brought it to David. But he would not drink of it; he poured it out to the LORD **<sup>17</sup>** and said, “Far be it from me, O LORD, that I should do this. Shall I drink the blood of the men who went at the risk of their lives?” Therefore he would not drink it. These things the three mighty men did.

**<sup>18</sup>** Now Abishai the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief of the Thirty. He wielded his spear against three hundred and killed them and won a name beside the Three. **<sup>19</sup>** He was the most honored of the Thirty and became their commander, but he did not become one of the Three.

**<sup>20</sup>** And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was a valiant man of Kabzeel, a doer of great deeds. He struck down the two sons of Ariel of Moab. He also went down and struck a lion in the midst of a pit on a day when snow had fallen. **<sup>21</sup>** He struck down an Egyptian, a man of great stature. The Egyptian had a spear in his hand, but Benaiah went down to him with a staff, and he snatched the spear from the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear. **<sup>22</sup>** These things Benaiah the son of Jehoiada did, and won a name beside the Three mighty men. **<sup>23</sup>** He was more honored than the Thirty, but he did not become one of the Three. And David set him over his guard.

**<sup>24</sup>** Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the Thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem, **<sup>25</sup>** Shammah of Harod, Elika of Harod, **<sup>26</sup>** Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh of Tekoa, **<sup>27</sup>** Abiezer of Anathoth, Mebunnai the Hushathite, **<sup>28</sup>** Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai of Netophah, **<sup>29</sup>** Heleb the son of Baanah of Netophah, Ittai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the Benjaminites, **<sup>30</sup>** Benaiah of Pirathon, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash, **<sup>31</sup>** Abi-albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth of Bahurim, **<sup>32</sup>** Eliahba of Shaalbon, the sons of Jashen, Jonathan, **<sup>33</sup>** Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Ararite, **<sup>34</sup>** Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai of Maacah, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite, **<sup>35</sup>** Hezro of Carmel, Paarai the Arbite, **<sup>36</sup>** Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite, **<sup>37</sup>** Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai of Beeroth, the armor-bearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah, **<sup>38</sup>** Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite, **<sup>39</sup>** Uriah the Hittite—thirty-seven in all. 

## Chapter 24

**<sup>1</sup>** Again the anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He incited David against them, saying, “Go, count Israel and Judah.” **<sup>2</sup>** So the king said to Joab, the commander of the army who was with him, “Go throughout all the tribes of Israel, from Dan to Beersheba, and count the people, so that I may know the number of the people.” **<sup>3</sup>** But Joab said to the king, “May the LORD your God add to the people a hundred times as many as they are, while the eyes of my lord the king still see it! But why does my lord the king delight in this thing?” **<sup>4</sup>** Yet the king’s word prevailed against Joab and against the commanders of the army. So Joab and the commanders of the army went out from the presence of the king to count the people of Israel.

**<sup>5</sup>** They crossed the Jordan and camped at Aroer, to the right of the town that is in the midst of the valley of Gad and toward Jazer. **<sup>6</sup>** Then they came to Gilead and to the land of Tahtim-hodshi, and they came to Dan-jaan and around to Sidon. **<sup>7</sup>** They came to the fortress of Tyre and to all the cities of the Hivites and the Canaanites, and they went out to the Negev of Judah at Beersheba. **<sup>8</sup>** So when they had gone through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.

**<sup>9</sup>** Joab gave the number of the count of the people to the king: there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men who drew the sword, and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand. **<sup>10</sup>** But David’s heart struck him after he had counted the people. And David said to the LORD, “I have sinned greatly in what I have done. But now, O LORD, please take away the guilt of Your servant, for I have acted very foolishly.”

**<sup>11</sup>** When David rose in the morning, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Gad, David’s seer, saying, **<sup>12</sup>** “Go and speak to David, ‘Thus says the LORD: I offer you three things; choose one of them, so that I may do it to you.’” **<sup>13</sup>** So Gad came to David and told him. He said to him, “Shall seven years of famine come to you in your land? Or shall you flee three months before your foes while they pursue you? Or shall there be three days of pestilence in your land? Now consider and see what answer I shall return to Him who sent me.” **<sup>14</sup>** Then David said to Gad, “I am in great distress. Let us fall into the hand of the LORD, for His mercies are great; but do not let me fall into the hand of man.”

**<sup>15</sup>** So the LORD sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning until the appointed time, and seventy thousand men from Dan to Beersheba died. **<sup>16</sup>** When the angel stretched out his hand toward Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD relented from the calamity and said to the angel who was destroying the people, “It is enough; now withdraw your hand.” And the angel of the LORD was by the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite. **<sup>17</sup>** Then David spoke to the LORD when he saw the angel who was striking the people and said, “Behold, it is I who have sinned, and it is I who have done wrong. But these sheep, what have they done? Please let Your hand be against me and against my father’s house.”

**<sup>18</sup>** Then Gad came to David that day and said to him, “Go up, raise an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite.” **<sup>19</sup>** So David went up, according to the word of Gad, as the LORD had commanded. **<sup>20</sup>** Araunah looked down and saw the king and his servants crossing over toward him, and Araunah went out and bowed himself before the king with his face to the ground. **<sup>21</sup>** Araunah said, “Why has my lord the king come to his servant?”<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;David said, “To buy the threshing floor from you, to build an altar to the LORD, so that the plague may be stopped from the people.”<br/>
**<sup>22</sup>** Araunah said to David, “Let my lord the king take and offer up what is good in his eyes. Look, the oxen for the burnt offering and the threshing sledges and the yokes of the oxen for the wood. **<sup>23</sup>** All this, O king, Araunah gives to the king.” And Araunah said to the king, “May the LORD your God accept you.” **<sup>24</sup>** But the king said to Araunah, “No, I will buy it from you for a price. I will not offer burnt offerings to the LORD my God that cost me nothing.” So David bought the threshing floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver. **<sup>25</sup>** David built there an altar to the LORD and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. And the LORD responded to the plea for the land, and the plague was stopped from Israel. 