# The First Book of the Kings

## Chapter 1

**<sup>1</sup>** Now King David was old and advanced in years, and though they covered him with blankets, he could not get warm. **<sup>2</sup>** So his servants said to him, “Let them seek for my lord the king a young virgin, and let her attend the king and care for him, and let her lie in your bosom, so that my lord the king may keep warm.” **<sup>3</sup>** So they searched for a beautiful young woman throughout all the territory of Israel, and they found Abishag the Shunammite and brought her to the king. **<sup>4</sup>** The young woman was very beautiful, and she attended the king and served him, but the king did not sleep with her.

**<sup>5</sup>** Now Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, “I will be king.” And he prepared for himself chariots and horsemen and fifty men to run before him. **<sup>6</sup>** But his father had never contradicted him at any time by asking, “Why have you done so?” He was also very handsome, and he was the next oldest son after Absalom. **<sup>7</sup>** He conferred with Joab son of Zeruiah and with Abiathar the priest, and they supported Adonijah. **<sup>8</sup>** But Zadok the priest and Benaiah son of Jehoiada and Nathan the prophet and Shimei and Rei and David’s mighty men were not with Adonijah. **<sup>9</sup>** And Adonijah sacrificed sheep and oxen and fattened calves by the stone of Zoheleth, which is beside En Rogel, and he invited all his brothers, the king’s sons, and all the men of Judah, the king’s servants. **<sup>10</sup>** But he did not invite Nathan the prophet or Benaiah or the mighty men or Solomon his brother.

**<sup>11</sup>** Then Nathan spoke to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, saying, “Have you not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith has become king, and David our lord does not know it? **<sup>12</sup>** Now therefore come, let me give you advice so that you may save your life and the life of your son Solomon. **<sup>13</sup>** Go in to King David and say to him, ‘Did not you, my lord the king, swear to your servant, saying, “Surely Solomon your son shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne? Why then has Adonijah become king?”’ **<sup>14</sup>** Then, while you are still speaking with the king, I also will come in after you and confirm your words.” **<sup>15</sup>** So Bathsheba went in to the king in the inner room. The king was very old, and Abishag the Shunammite was attending to the king. **<sup>16</sup>** Bathsheba bowed and did obeisance to the king, and the king said, “What is your request?” **<sup>17</sup>** She said to him, “My lord, you swore by the LORD your God to your servant, ‘Solomon your son shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne.’ **<sup>18</sup>** But now, behold, Adonijah has become king, and you, my lord the king, do not know it. **<sup>19</sup>** He has sacrificed oxen and fattened calves and sheep in abundance, and has invited all the sons of the king and Abiathar the priest and Joab the commander of the army, but Solomon your servant he has not invited. **<sup>20</sup>** And you, my lord the king—the eyes of all Israel are on you to tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him. **<sup>21</sup>** Otherwise it will come to pass, when my lord the king sleeps with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon will be counted as offenders.”

**<sup>22</sup>** While she was still speaking with the king, Nathan the prophet came in. **<sup>23</sup>** They told the king, “Here is Nathan the prophet.” And he came in before the king and bowed before the king with his face to the ground. **<sup>24</sup>** And Nathan said, “My lord the king, have you said, ‘Adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne’? **<sup>25</sup>** For today he has gone down and has sacrificed oxen and fattened calves and sheep in abundance, and has invited all the king’s sons and the commanders of the army and Abiathar the priest, and behold, they are eating and drinking before him and saying, ‘Long live King Adonijah!’ **<sup>26</sup>** But me, your servant, and Zadok the priest and Benaiah son of Jehoiada and Solomon your servant he has not invited. **<sup>27</sup>** Has this thing been brought about by my lord the king, and have you not told your servant who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?”

**<sup>28</sup>** Then King David answered, “Call Bathsheba to me.” And she came in before the king and stood before the king. **<sup>29</sup>** The king swore and said, “As the LORD lives, who has redeemed my soul out of every trouble, **<sup>30</sup>** just as I swore to you by the LORD, the God of Israel, saying, ‘Solomon your son shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne in my place,’ I will make it happen this day.” **<sup>31</sup>** Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the ground and did obeisance to the king and said, “May my lord King David live forever!” **<sup>32</sup>** Then King David said, “Call to me Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet and Benaiah son of Jehoiada.” And they came before the king. **<sup>33</sup>** And the king said to them, “Take with you the servants of your lord and have Solomon my son ride on my own mule, and bring him down to Gihon. **<sup>34</sup>** And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there as king over Israel. Then blow the trumpet and say, ‘Long live King Solomon!’ **<sup>35</sup>** Then you shall come up after him, and he shall come and sit on my throne, for he shall be king in my place. I have appointed him to be ruler over Israel and over Judah.”

**<sup>36</sup>** Benaiah son of Jehoiada answered the king and said, “Amen! May the LORD, the God of my lord the king, say so too. **<sup>37</sup>** As the LORD has been with my lord the king, so may He be with Solomon, and may He make his throne greater than the throne of my lord King David.” **<sup>38</sup>** So Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet and Benaiah son of Jehoiada and the Cherethites and the Pelethites went down and had Solomon ride on King David’s mule, and they brought him to Gihon. **<sup>39</sup>** Then Zadok the priest took the horn of oil from the tent and anointed Solomon. They blew the trumpet, and all the people said, “Long live King Solomon!” **<sup>40</sup>** And all the people went up after him, playing flutes and rejoicing with great joy, so that the earth was split by their sound. **<sup>41</sup>** Adonijah and all the guests who were with him heard it as they had finished eating. And Joab heard the sound of the trumpet and said, “Why is the city making such an uproar?” **<sup>42</sup>** While he was still speaking, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest came, and Adonijah said, “Come in, for you are a valiant man and bring good news.” **<sup>43</sup>** But Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, “No, for our lord King David has made Solomon king. **<sup>44</sup>** The king has sent with him Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet and Benaiah son of Jehoiada and the Cherethites and the Pelethites, and they have caused him to ride on the king’s mule. **<sup>45</sup>** Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king at Gihon, and they have gone up from there rejoicing, so that the city is in an uproar. This is the sound that you have heard. **<sup>46</sup>** Moreover, Solomon sits on the royal throne. **<sup>47</sup>** Also the king’s servants came to bless our lord King David, saying, ‘May your God make the name of Solomon better than your name, and his throne greater than your throne,’ and the king bowed himself on the bed. **<sup>48</sup>** And the king also said, ‘Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who has granted one to sit on my throne this day, my eyes even seeing it.’”

**<sup>49</sup>** Then all the guests of Adonijah were afraid, and they rose and went each his own way. **<sup>50</sup>** And Adonijah feared Solomon, and he arose and went and took hold of the horns of the altar. **<sup>51</sup>** And it was told Solomon, saying, “Behold, Adonijah is afraid of King Solomon, for he has taken hold of the horns of the altar, saying, ‘Let King Solomon swear to me today that he will not put his servant to death with the sword.’” **<sup>52</sup>** Solomon said, “If he is a worthy man, not one of his hairs shall fall to the ground, but if wickedness is found in him, he shall die.” **<sup>53</sup>** So King Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar. He came and bowed to King Solomon, and Solomon said to him, “Go to your house.” 

## Chapter 2

**<sup>1</sup>** When the time drew near for David to die, he commanded Solomon his son, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “I am going the way of all the earth. Be strong, and show yourself a man. **<sup>3</sup>** Keep the charge of the LORD your God, to walk in His ways, to keep His statutes, His commandments, His ordinances, and His testimonies, as it is written in the Law of Moses, so that you may succeed in all that you do and wherever you turn, **<sup>4</sup>** and so that the LORD may establish His word which He spoke concerning me, saying, ‘If your sons are careful in their way, to walk before Me in faithfulness with all their heart and with all their soul, you shall not lack a man on the throne of Israel.’ **<sup>5</sup>** Moreover, you know what Joab son of Zeruiah did to me, what he did to the two commanders of the armies of Israel—to Abner son of Ner and to Amasa son of Jether—whom he killed, shedding the blood of war in peace and putting the blood of war on his belt that was around his waist and on the sandals that were on his feet. **<sup>6</sup>** Do therefore according to your wisdom, but do not let his gray head go down to the grave in peace. **<sup>7</sup>** But deal loyally with the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be among those who eat at your table, for they came to me when I fled from Absalom your brother. **<sup>8</sup>** And as you see, Shimei son of Gera, the Benjaminite from Bahurim, is with you. He cursed me with a grievous curse on the day I went to Mahanaim. But when he came down to meet me at the Jordan, I swore to him by the LORD, saying, ‘I will not put you to death with the sword.’ **<sup>9</sup>** Now therefore do not hold him guiltless, for you are a wise man. You will know what you ought to do to him, and you shall bring his gray head down with blood to the grave.”

**<sup>10</sup>** Then David slept with his fathers and was buried in the city of David. **<sup>11</sup>** The days that David reigned over Israel were forty years. He reigned seven years in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem.

**<sup>12</sup>** So Solomon sat on the throne of David his father, and his kingdom was firmly established. **<sup>13</sup>** Then Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, “Do you come in peace?” He said, “Yes, in Peace.” **<sup>14</sup>** Then he said, “I have a request to ask of you.” And she said, “Speak.” **<sup>15</sup>** He said, “You know that the kingdom was mine, and that all Israel expected me to reign. However, the kingdom has turned and become my brother’s, as was the will of the LORD. **<sup>16</sup>** Now I ask one request of you; do not refuse me.” And she said to him, “Speak.” **<sup>17</sup>** Then he said, “Please speak to Solomon the king, for he will not refuse you, to give me Abishag the Shunammite as a wife.” **<sup>18</sup>** Bathsheba said, “Very well; I will speak for you to the king.” **<sup>19</sup>** So Bathsheba went to King Solomon to speak to him on behalf of Adonijah. And the king rose to meet her and bowed to her. Then he sat on his throne and had a seat brought for the king’s mother, and she sat at his right hand. **<sup>20</sup>** Then she said, “I ask one small request of you; do not refuse me.” And the king said to her, “Ask, my mother, for I will not refuse you.” **<sup>21</sup>** She said, “Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah, your brother, as a wife.” **<sup>22</sup>** King Solomon answered and said to his mother, “And why do you ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? Ask for him the kingdom also—for he is my older brother—yes, for him and for Abiathar the priest and for Joab son of Zeruiah!” **<sup>23</sup>** Then King Solomon swore by the LORD, saying, “May God do so to me and more also if Adonijah has not spoken this word against his own life! **<sup>24</sup>** Now therefore as the LORD lives, who has established me and set me on the throne of David my father and who has made me a house as He promised, Adonijah shall be put to death today.” **<sup>25</sup>** So King Solomon sent Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and he struck him down, and he died.

**<sup>26</sup>** To Abiathar the priest the king said, “Go to Anathoth, to your estate, for you deserve death, but I will not put you to death at this time because you carried the ark of the Lord GOD before my father David, and because you shared in all the affliction my father suffered.” **<sup>27</sup>** So Solomon expelled Abiathar from being priest to the LORD, thus fulfilling the word of the LORD that He had spoken concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.

**<sup>28</sup>** When the news came to Joab—for Joab had supported Adonijah, though he had not supported Absalom—Joab fled to the tent of the LORD and caught hold of the horns of the altar. **<sup>29</sup>** It was told King Solomon that Joab had fled to the tent of the LORD and was beside the altar. Solomon sent Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, saying, “Go, strike him down.” **<sup>30</sup>** So Benaiah came to the tent of the LORD and said to him, “The king commands, ‘Come out.’” But he said, “No, I will die here.” Then Benaiah reported back to the king, saying, “This is what Joab said, and this is how he answered me.” **<sup>31</sup>** The king said to him, “Do as he has said. Strike him down and bury him, and thus remove from me and from my father's house the guilt of the blood that Joab shed without cause. **<sup>32</sup>** The LORD will return his blood upon his own head, because he struck down two men more righteous and better than himself, and killed them with the sword—Abner son of Ner, commander of the army of Israel, and Amasa son of Jether, commander of the army of Judah—though my father David had no part in it. **<sup>33</sup>** So their blood shall return upon the head of Joab and upon the head of his descendants forever. But for David and his descendants and his house and his throne, there shall be peace from the LORD forever.” **<sup>34</sup>** Then Benaiah son of Jehoiada went up and struck him down and killed him, and he was buried at his house in the wilderness.

**<sup>35</sup>** The king put Benaiah son of Jehoiada over the army in his place, and the king put Zadok the priest in the place of Abiathar. **<sup>36</sup>** Then the king sent and summoned Shimei and said to him, “Build yourself a house in Jerusalem and live there, and do not go out from there to any place whatever. **<sup>37</sup>** For on the day you go out and cross the brook Kidron, know for certain that you shall surely die; your blood shall be on your own head.” **<sup>38</sup>** Shimei said to the king, “The saying is good. As my lord the king has said, so will your servant do.” So Shimei lived in Jerusalem for many days. **<sup>39</sup>** But it came about at the end of three years that two of Shimei’s servants ran away to Achish son of Maacah, king of Gath. And they told Shimei, “Behold, your servants are in Gath.” **<sup>40</sup>** Then Shimei arose and saddled his donkey and went to Gath to Achish to seek his servants. Shimei went and brought his servants from Gath. **<sup>41</sup>** It was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath and had returned. **<sup>42</sup>** The king sent and summoned Shimei and said to him, “Did I not make you swear by the LORD and solemnly warn you, saying, ‘Know for certain that on the day you go out and go to any place whatever, you shall surely die’? And you said to me, ‘The saying is good; I have heard.’ **<sup>43</sup>** Why then have you not kept the oath of the LORD and the commandment that I charged you with?” **<sup>44</sup>** The king said also to Shimei, “You know in your heart all the evil that you did to David my father. Therefore the LORD will return your evil onto your own head. **<sup>45</sup>** But King Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before the LORD forever.” **<sup>46</sup>** So the king commanded Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and he went out and struck him down, and he died, establishing the kingdom in Solomon's hand. 

## Chapter 3

**<sup>1</sup>** Solomon made a marriage alliance with Pharaoh king of Egypt. He took Pharaoh’s daughter and brought her into the city of David until he had finished building his own house, the house of the LORD, and the wall around Jerusalem. **<sup>2</sup>** However, the people were sacrificing at the high places, because no house had yet been built for the name of the LORD. **<sup>3</sup>** Solomon loved the LORD, walking in the statutes of David his father, but he also sacrificed and burned incense at the high places. **<sup>4</sup>** The king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, for that was the great high place. Solomon offered a thousand burnt offerings on that altar. **<sup>5</sup>** At Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night. And God said, “Ask what I shall give you.” **<sup>6</sup>** Solomon said, “You have shown great loyal love to Your servant David my father, because he walked before You in truth and righteousness and in uprightness of heart toward You. And You have kept for him this great loyal love and have given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day. **<sup>7</sup>** Now, O LORD my God, You have made Your servant king in place of David my father, though I am but a little child; I do not know how to go out or come in. **<sup>8</sup>** And Your servant is in the midst of Your people whom You have chosen, a great people, too many to be numbered or counted. **<sup>9</sup>** Give Your servant therefore an understanding heart to judge Your people, that I may discern between good and evil—for who is able to judge this great people of Yours?”

**<sup>10</sup>** It was pleasing in the eyes of the Lord that Solomon had asked this thing. **<sup>11</sup>** And God said to him, “Because you have asked this thing, and have not asked for yourself long life or riches or the life of your enemies, but have asked for yourself understanding to hear judgment, **<sup>12</sup>** behold, I now do according to your word. Behold, I give you a wise and understanding heart, so that none like you has been before you, and none like you shall arise after you. **<sup>13</sup>** I also give you what you have not asked, both riches and honor, so that no king shall compare with you all your days. **<sup>14</sup>** And if you walk in My ways, keeping My statutes and My commandments, as your father David walked, then I will lengthen your days.” **<sup>15</sup>** Then Solomon awoke, and behold, it was a dream. And he came to Jerusalem and stood before the ark of the covenant of the LORD and offered up burnt offerings and peace offerings, and made a feast for all his servants.

**<sup>16</sup>** Then two women who were prostitutes came to the king and stood before him. **<sup>17</sup>** And the one woman said, “O my lord, this woman and I dwell in the same house, and I gave birth while she was in the house. **<sup>18</sup>** On the third day after I gave birth, this woman also gave birth. We were together; there was no one else with us in the house—only the two of us were in the house. **<sup>19</sup>** Then this woman's son died in the night, because she lay on him. **<sup>20</sup>** And she rose at midnight and took my son from beside me while your servant slept, and laid him in her bosom, and laid her dead son in my bosom. **<sup>21</sup>** When I rose in the morning to nurse my son, behold, he was dead. But when I looked at him closely in the morning, behold, he was not the son whom I bore.” **<sup>22</sup>** Then the other woman said, “No! The living child is mine, and the dead one is your son.” But the first said, “No! The dead child is yours, and the living one is mine.” Thus they spoke before the king. **<sup>23</sup>** Then the king said, “The one says, ‘This is my son who lives, and your son is dead,’ and the other says, ‘No, but your son is dead, and my son is the living one.’” **<sup>24</sup>** And the king said, “Bring me a sword.” So they brought a sword before the king. **<sup>25</sup>** And the king said, “Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one and half to the other.” **<sup>26</sup>** Then the woman whose son was alive said to the king—because her heart yearned for her son—she said, “Please, my lord, give her the living child, and do not kill him.” But the other said, “He shall be neither mine nor yours; divide him.” **<sup>27</sup>** Then the king answered and said, “Give her the living child, and do not kill him; she is his mother.” **<sup>28</sup>** And all Israel heard of the judgment that the king had rendered, and they feared the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to administer justice. 

## Chapter 4

**<sup>1</sup>** King Solomon was king over all Israel. **<sup>2</sup>** These were his officials: Azariah son of Zadok was the priest. **<sup>3</sup>** Elihoreph and Ahijah, sons of Shisha, were secretaries; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was the recorder. **<sup>4</sup>** Benaiah son of Jehoiada was over the army; Zadok and Abiathar were priests; **<sup>5</sup>** Azariah son of Nathan was over the officers; Zabud son of Nathan, a priest, was the king’s friend; **<sup>6</sup>** Ahishar was over the household; and Adoniram son of Abda was over the forced labor.

**<sup>7</sup>** Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel, who provided food for the king and his household. Each one had to provide food for a month in the year. **<sup>8</sup>** These were their names: Ben-Hur, in the hill country of Ephraim; **<sup>9</sup>** Ben-Deker, in Makaz, Shaalbim, Beth-shemesh, and Elon-beth-hanan; **<sup>10</sup>** Ben-Hesed, in Arubboth—to him belonged Socoh and all the land of Hepher; **<sup>11</sup>** Ben-Abinadab, in all Naphath-dor (he had Taphath, the daughter of Solomon, as wife); **<sup>12</sup>** Baana son of Ahilud, in Taanach, Megiddo, and all Beth-shean, which is beside Zarethan below Jezreel, from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, as far as beyond Jokmeam; **<sup>13</sup>** Ben-Geber, in Ramoth-gilead (to him belonged the villages of Jair son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead, and he had the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, sixty great cities with walls and bronze bars); **<sup>14</sup>** Ahinadab son of Iddo, in Mahanaim; **<sup>15</sup>** Ahimaaz, in Naphtali (he also took Basemath, the daughter of Solomon, as wife); **<sup>16</sup>** Baana son of Hushai, in Asher and Bealoth; **<sup>17</sup>** Jehoshaphat son of Paruah, in Issachar; **<sup>18</sup>** Shimei son of Ela, in Benjamin; **<sup>19</sup>** Geber son of Uri, in the land of Gilead, the land of Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of Bashan—he was the only officer in that region.

**<sup>20</sup>** Judah and Israel were as numerous as the sand that is by the sea in multitude. They ate and drank and were joyful. **<sup>21</sup>** Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms from the River to the land of the Philistines and to the border of Egypt. They brought tribute and served Solomon all the days of his life.

**<sup>22</sup>** Solomon's provision for one day was thirty kors of fine flour, sixty kors of meal, **<sup>23</sup>** ten fat oxen, twenty pasture-fed oxen, a hundred sheep, besides deer, gazelles, roebucks, and fattened fowl. **<sup>24</sup>** For he had dominion over all the region west of the River, from Tiphsah to Gaza, over all the kings west of the River. And he had peace on all sides around him. **<sup>25</sup>** Judah and Israel lived in safety, every man under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, all the days of Solomon.

**<sup>26</sup>** Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen. **<sup>27</sup>** Those officers provided food for King Solomon and for all who came to King Solomon’s table, each in his month. They left nothing lacking. **<sup>28</sup>** Barley also and straw for the horses and swift steeds they brought to the place where it was needed, each according to his duty. **<sup>29</sup>** God gave Solomon wisdom and very great understanding and breadth of mind like the sand that is on the seashore. **<sup>30</sup>** Solomon’s wisdom surpassed the wisdom of all the sons of the east and all the wisdom of Egypt. **<sup>31</sup>** For he was wiser than all men, wiser than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol, and his fame was in all the surrounding nations. **<sup>32</sup>** He spoke three thousand proverbs, and his songs were a thousand and five. **<sup>33</sup>** He spoke of trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon to the hyssop that grows out of the wall. He also spoke of beasts, and of birds, and of creeping things, and of fish. **<sup>34</sup>** And men came from all peoples to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all the kings of the earth who had heard of his wisdom. 

## Chapter 5

**<sup>1</sup>** Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants to Solomon, for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the place of his father, for Hiram had always loved David. **<sup>2</sup>** Solomon sent word to Hiram, saying, **<sup>3</sup>** “You know that David my father was not able to build a house for the name of the LORD his God because of the wars which surrounded him, until the LORD put them under the soles of his feet. **<sup>4</sup>** But now the LORD my God has given me rest on every side; there is neither adversary nor misfortune. **<sup>5</sup>** So I intend to build a house for the name of the LORD my God, just as the LORD spoke to David my father, saying, ‘Your son, whom I will set on your throne in your place, he shall build the house for My name.’ **<sup>6</sup>** Now therefore, command that they cut down cedars for me from Lebanon, and my servants will be with your servants, and I will give you wages for your servants, according to all that you say. For you know that there is no one among us who knows how to cut timber like the Sidonians.”

**<sup>7</sup>** When Hiram heard the words of Solomon, he rejoiced greatly and said, “Blessed be the LORD this day, who has given to David a wise son over this great people.” **<sup>8</sup>** So Hiram sent word to Solomon, saying, “I have heard the message that you sent to me. I will do all your desire concerning the cedar and cypress timber. **<sup>9</sup>** My servants will bring them down from Lebanon to the sea, and I will make them into rafts to go by sea to the place that you indicate to me. I will break them up there, and you shall carry them away. Then you shall accomplish my desire by giving food for my household.”

**<sup>10</sup>** So Hiram gave Solomon all the cedar and cypress timber that he desired. **<sup>11</sup>** Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand cors of wheat as food for his household, and twenty cors of beaten oil. Solomon gave this to Hiram year by year. **<sup>12</sup>** And the LORD gave Solomon wisdom, just as He had promised him. And there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and the two of them made a covenant.

**<sup>13</sup>** King Solomon raised a forced labor levy out of all Israel, and the levy numbered thirty thousand men. **<sup>14</sup>** He sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month in shifts. They were a month in Lebanon and two months at home. Adoniram was over the forced labor. **<sup>15</sup>** Solomon had seventy thousand burden bearers and eighty thousand hewers of stone in the hill country, **<sup>16</sup>** besides Solomon’s chief officers who were over the work, three thousand three hundred, who ruled over the people who were doing the work. **<sup>17</sup>** At the king’s command they quarried great stones, costly stones, to lay the foundation of the house with hewn stone. **<sup>18</sup>** So Solomon’s builders and Hiram’s builders and the men of Gebal cut them, and prepared the timber and the stones to build the house. 

## Chapter 6

**<sup>1</sup>** In the four hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon’s reign over Israel, in the month of Ziv (which is the second month), he began to build the house of the LORD.

**<sup>2</sup>** The house that King Solomon built for the LORD was sixty cubits in length, twenty cubits in width, and thirty cubits in height. **<sup>3</sup>** The vestibule in front of the nave of the house was twenty cubits long, corresponding to the width of the house, and ten cubits deep in front of the house. **<sup>4</sup>** He made windows with recessed frames for the house.

**<sup>5</sup>** He built a structure against the wall of the house, enclosing the walls of the house around the nave and the inner sanctuary; he made side chambers all around. **<sup>6</sup>** The lowest story was five cubits wide, the middle was six cubits wide, and the third was seven cubits wide; for he made offset ledges around the outside of the house, so that the beams would not be inserted into the walls of the house.

**<sup>7</sup>** When the house was being built, it was constructed with finished stones cut at the quarry, so that neither hammer nor axe nor any iron tool was heard in the house while it was being built.

**<sup>8</sup>** The entrance for the lowest story of the side chambers was on the south side of the house, and one went up by winding stairs to the middle story, and from the middle to the third. **<sup>9</sup>** So he built the house and completed it, and he roofed the house with beams and planks of cedar. **<sup>10</sup>** He built the side chambers against the entire house, each five cubits high, and they were fastened to the house with cedar timbers.

**<sup>11</sup>** Then the word of the LORD came to Solomon, saying, **<sup>12</sup>** “Concerning this house which you are building, if you walk in My statutes and execute My ordinances and keep all My commandments by walking in them, then I will establish My word with you, which I spoke to your father David. **<sup>13</sup>** I will dwell among the sons of Israel and will not forsake My people Israel.”

**<sup>14</sup>** So Solomon built the house and completed it.

**<sup>15</sup>** He lined the walls of the house on the inside with cedar boards; from the floor of the house to the ceiling he covered them with wood on the inside. He overlaid the floor of the house with planks of cypress. **<sup>16</sup>** He built twenty cubits from the rear of the house with cedar boards from the floor to the ceiling, and he built it within as an inner sanctuary, the Most Holy Place. **<sup>17</sup>** The house, that is, the nave in front of the inner sanctuary, was forty cubits long. **<sup>18</sup>** The cedar within the house was carved in the form of gourds and open flowers. All was cedar; no stone was seen.

**<sup>19</sup>** He prepared the inner sanctuary in the innermost part of the house, to set the ark of the covenant of the LORD there. **<sup>20</sup>** The inner sanctuary was twenty cubits long, twenty cubits wide, and twenty cubits high, and he overlaid it with pure gold. He also overlaid the altar with cedar. **<sup>21</sup>** Solomon overlaid the inside of the house with pure gold, and he drew chains of gold across the front of the inner sanctuary, and he overlaid it with gold. **<sup>22</sup>** He overlaid the whole house with gold, until all the house was finished. He also overlaid the entire altar that belonged to the inner sanctuary with gold.

**<sup>23</sup>** In the inner sanctuary he made two cherubim of olivewood, each ten cubits high. **<sup>24</sup>** One wing of the cherub was five cubits, and the other wing of the cherub was five cubits; from the tip of one wing to the tip of the other was ten cubits. **<sup>25</sup>** The other cherub also was ten cubits; both cherubim were of the same measure and the same form. **<sup>26</sup>** The height of one cherub was ten cubits, and so was the other cherub. **<sup>27</sup>** He set the cherubim within the inner house, and the wings of the cherubim were spread out, so that the wing of one touched the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall, and their wings touched each other in the middle of the house. **<sup>28</sup>** He overlaid the cherubim with gold.

**<sup>29</sup>** He carved all the walls of the house round about with carved figures of cherubim, palm trees, and open flowers, in both the inner and outer rooms. **<sup>30</sup>** He overlaid the floor of the house with gold, in both the inner and outer rooms.

**<sup>31</sup>** For the entrance of the inner sanctuary he made doors of olivewood; the lintel and doorposts formed a fifth of the wall. **<sup>32</sup>** He carved on them cherubim, palm trees, and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold, and he spread gold on the cherubim and on the palm trees.

**<sup>33</sup>** So also he made for the entrance to the nave doorposts of olivewood, forming a fourth of the wall, **<sup>34</sup>** and two doors of cypress wood; the two leaves of the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were folding. **<sup>35</sup>** He carved on them cherubim, palm trees, and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold evenly applied on the carved work.

**<sup>36</sup>** He built the inner court with three courses of cut stone and one course of cedar beams.

**<sup>37</sup>** In the fourth year, in the month of Ziv, the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid, **<sup>38</sup>** and in the eleventh year, in the month of Bul (which is the eighth month), the house was finished in all its parts and according to all its specifications. It took him seven years to build it. 

## Chapter 7

**<sup>1</sup>** But Solomon was building his own house for thirteen years, and he finished all his house. **<sup>2</sup>** He built the House of the Forest of Lebanon: one hundred cubits in length, fifty cubits in width, and thirty cubits in height, on four rows of cedar pillars with cedar beams on the pillars. **<sup>3</sup>** And it was roofed with cedar above the chambers that were on the forty-five pillars, fifteen in a row. **<sup>4</sup>** There were three rows of window frames, and window was opposite window in three tiers. **<sup>5</sup>** And all the doorways and posts had square frames, and window was opposite window in three tiers. **<sup>6</sup>** And he made the Hall of Pillars, fifty cubits long and thirty cubits wide, with a porch in front, and pillars and a threshold in front of them. **<sup>7</sup>** And he made the Hall of the Throne where he would judge—the Hall of Judgment—and it was paneled with cedar from floor to ceiling. **<sup>8</sup>** And his house where he would dwell, in the other court behind the hall, was of like workmanship. He also made a house like this hall for Pharaoh’s daughter, whom Solomon had taken as a wife.

**<sup>9</sup>** All these were made with costly stones, cut according to measure, sawed with saws inside and outside, from the foundation to the coping, and from the outside to the great court. **<sup>10</sup>** And the foundation was laid with costly stones, large stones—stones of ten cubits and stones of eight cubits. **<sup>11</sup>** And above were costly stones, cut according to measure, and cedar wood. **<sup>12</sup>** And the great court all around was with three rows of cut stone and a row of cedar beams, just like the inner court of the house of the LORD and the porch of the house.

**<sup>13</sup>** And King Solomon sent and brought Hiram from Tyre. **<sup>14</sup>** He was the son of a widow from the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in bronze. And he was filled with wisdom and understanding and skill to work all kinds of work in bronze. So he came to King Solomon and did all his work. **<sup>15</sup>** And he cast two pillars of bronze; eighteen cubits was the height of one pillar, and a line of twelve cubits encircled the second pillar. **<sup>16</sup>** And he made two capitals of molten bronze to set on the tops of the pillars: the height of one capital was five cubits, and the height of the other capital was five cubits. **<sup>17</sup>** There were lattices of checkerwork, wreaths of chainwork, for the capitals on the tops of the pillars—seven for the one capital and seven for the other capital. **<sup>18</sup>** And he made the pillars with two rows of pomegranates all around on the one latticework to cover the capitals that were on the tops of the pillars, and the same he did for the other capital. **<sup>19</sup>** Now the capitals that were on the tops of the pillars in the porch were of lily design, four cubits high. **<sup>20</sup>** And the capitals on the two pillars were also above, close by the bulge that was beside the latticework. And there were two hundred pomegranates in rows all around the one capital, and so also on the other capital. **<sup>21</sup>** And he set up the pillars at the porch of the temple. He set up the right pillar and called its name Jachin, and he set up the left pillar and called its name Boaz. **<sup>22</sup>** And on the tops of the pillars was lily design. So the work of the pillars was finished. **<sup>23</sup>** And he made the sea of cast metal, ten cubits from brim to brim, round in shape, and five cubits in height. A line of thirty cubits encircled it all around. **<sup>24</sup>** And under its brim were gourds encircling it, ten to a cubit, encircling the sea all around. The gourds were cast in two rows when it was cast. **<sup>25</sup>** It stood on twelve oxen: three facing north, three facing west, three facing south, and three facing east. The sea was set on them, and all their hindquarters were inward. **<sup>26</sup>** And it was a handbreadth thick, and its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like a lily blossom. It held two thousand baths. **<sup>27</sup>** And he made the ten stands of bronze: each stand was four cubits long, four cubits wide, and three cubits high.

**<sup>28</sup>** And this was the design of the stands: they had panels, and the panels were set in frames. **<sup>29</sup>** And on the panels that were set in the frames were lions, oxen, and cherubim, and there was a pedastal above upon the frames. And beneath the lions and oxen were wreaths of hanging work. **<sup>30</sup>** And each stand had four bronze wheels with bronze axles. And the four feet of the stand had supports; under the basin were cast supports on each side, with wreaths. **<sup>31</sup>** Its opening inside the crown at the top was a cubit in diameter, and the opening was round, made like a pedestal, a cubit and a half in height. Also on the opening were engravings, and their panels were square, not round. **<sup>32</sup>** And the four wheels were underneath the panels, and the axles of the wheels were joined to the stand. The height of a wheel was a cubit and a half. **<sup>33</sup>** The workmanship of the wheels was like the workmanship of a chariot wheel. Their axles, their rims, their spokes, and their hubs were all cast. **<sup>34</sup>** And there were four supports at the four corners of each stand. The supports were of one piece with the stand itself. **<sup>35</sup>** And at the top of the stand was a round band half a cubit high. And at the top of the stand, its stays and its panels were of one piece with it. **<sup>36</sup>** And on the surfaces of its stays and on its panels he engraved cherubim, lions, and palm trees, according to the space of each, with wreaths all around.

**<sup>37</sup>** This is how he made the ten stands: all of them were cast alike, of the same measure and the same form. **<sup>38</sup>** And he made ten basins of bronze—each basin held forty baths and measured four cubits—each basin was set on one of the ten stands. **<sup>39</sup>** And he set the stands, five on the right side of the house and five on the left side of the house. And he set the sea on the right side of the house to the southeast. **<sup>40</sup>** And Hiram made the basins, the shovels, and the bowls. So Hiram finished doing all the work he did for King Solomon on the house of the LORD: **<sup>41</sup>** the two pillars, the two bowls of the capitals that were on top of the two pillars, the two latticeworks to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars, **<sup>42</sup>** the four hundred pomegranates for the two latticeworks—two rows of pomegranates for each latticework to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the pillars, **<sup>43</sup>** the ten stands and the ten basins on the stands, **<sup>44</sup>** the one sea and the twelve oxen under the sea, **<sup>45</sup>** the pots, the shovels, and the bowls. All these utensils that Hiram made for King Solomon for the house of the LORD were of polished bronze.

**<sup>46</sup>** The king cast them in the plain of the Jordan, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarethan. **<sup>47</sup>** And Solomon left all the utensils unweighed because there were so many—the weight of the bronze was not ascertained. **<sup>48</sup>** And Solomon made all the furnishings that were in the house of the LORD: the golden altar, the golden table on which was the bread of the Presence, **<sup>49</sup>** the lampstands of pure gold—five on the right side and five on the left in front of the inner sanctuary—with the flowers, the lamps, and the tongs of gold, **<sup>50</sup>** the cups, the snuffers, the bowls, the ladles, and the firepans of pure gold, and the sockets for the doors of the inner house, the Most Holy Place, and for the doors of the nave of the house, of gold. **<sup>51</sup>** And all the work that King Solomon did on the house of the LORD was finished. And Solomon brought in the things that David his father had dedicated—the silver, the gold, and the vessels—and put them in the treasuries of the house of the LORD. 

## Chapter 8

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the heads of the tribes, the chiefs of the fathers’ houses of the sons of Israel, to King Solomon in Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the city of David, which is Zion. **<sup>2</sup>** And all the men of Israel assembled to King Solomon at the feast, in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month. **<sup>3</sup>** And all the elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the ark. **<sup>4</sup>** And they brought up the ark of the LORD, and the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the tent—the priests and the Levites brought them up.

**<sup>5</sup>** And King Solomon and all the congregation of Israel, who were assembled to him before the ark, were sacrificing sheep and oxen that could not be counted or numbered for multitude. **<sup>6</sup>** Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of the LORD to its place, into the inner sanctuary of the house, to the Most Holy Place, under the wings of the cherubim. **<sup>7</sup>** For the cherubim spread out their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and its poles above. **<sup>8</sup>** And the poles were so long that the ends of the poles were seen from the Holy Place before the inner sanctuary, but they were not seen outside. And they are there to this day. **<sup>9</sup>** There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets of stone which Moses put there at Horeb, where the LORD made a covenant with the sons of Israel when they came out of the land of Egypt.

**<sup>10</sup>** And it came to pass when the priests came out of the Holy Place, that the cloud filled the house of the LORD, **<sup>11</sup>** so that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud, for the glory of the LORD filled the house of the LORD.

**<sup>12</sup>** Then Solomon said, “The LORD has said that he would dwell in thick darkness. **<sup>13</sup>** I have indeed built you a lofty house, a place for you to dwell in forever.”

**<sup>14</sup>** Then the king turned around and blessed all the assembly of Israel, while all the assembly of Israel stood. **<sup>15</sup>** And he said, “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my father, and has fulfilled it with his hand, saying, **<sup>16</sup>** ‘Since the day that I brought my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city from all the tribes of Israel to build a house that my name might be there. But I chose David to be over my people Israel.’ **<sup>17</sup>** Now it was in the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of the LORD, the God of Israel. **<sup>18</sup>** But the LORD said to David my father, ‘Whereas it was in your heart to build a house for my name, you did well that it was in your heart. **<sup>19</sup>** Nevertheless, you shall not build the house, but your son who shall come from your body—he shall build the house for my name.’ **<sup>20</sup>** So the LORD has established his word that he spoke, and I have risen in place of David my father and sit on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and I have built the house for the name of the LORD, the God of Israel. **<sup>21</sup>** And I have set there a place for the ark, in which is the covenant of the LORD that he made with our fathers when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.”

**<sup>22</sup>** Then Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of all the assembly of Israel and spread out his hands toward heaven. **<sup>23</sup>** And he said, “O LORD, God of Israel, there is no God like you in heaven above or on earth beneath, keeping covenant and steadfast love with your servants who walk before you with all their heart, **<sup>24</sup>** who have kept with your servant David my father what you declared to him. Indeed, you spoke with your mouth, and with your hand have fulfilled it this day. **<sup>25</sup>** Now therefore, O LORD, God of Israel, keep for your servant David my father what you promised him, saying, ‘You shall not lack a man before me to sit on the throne of Israel, if only your sons take heed to their way, to walk before me as you have walked before me.’ **<sup>26</sup>** Now therefore, O God of Israel, let your word be confirmed that you spoke to your servant David my father. **<sup>27</sup>** But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, the heavens—even the highest heaven—cannot contain you; how much less this house that I have built! **<sup>28</sup>** Yet turn toward the prayer of your servant and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to listen to the cry and to the prayer that your servant is praying before you today, **<sup>29</sup>** that your eyes may be open toward this house night and day, toward the place of which you have said, ‘My name shall be there,’ to listen to the prayer that your servant shall pray toward this place. **<sup>30</sup>** And listen to the plea of your servant and of your people Israel when they pray toward this place. Hear in heaven, your dwelling place; and when you hear, forgive. **<sup>31</sup>** If a man sins against his neighbor and he is required to take an oath, and he comes and swears before your altar in this house, **<sup>32</sup>** then hear in heaven and act and judge your servants, condemning the wicked by bringing his way on his own head, and justifying the righteous by giving him according to his righteousness. **<sup>33</sup>** When your people Israel are defeated before an enemy because they have sinned against you, and they turn back to you and confess your name and pray and make supplication to you in this house, **<sup>34</sup>** then hear in heaven and forgive the sin of your people Israel and bring them back to the land that you gave to their fathers. **<sup>35</sup>** When the heavens are shut up and there is no rain because they have sinned against you, and they pray toward this place and confess your name and turn from their sin because you afflict them, **<sup>36</sup>** then hear in heaven and forgive the sin of your servants and of your people Israel, when you teach them the good way in which they should walk; and give rain upon your land, which you have given to your people for an inheritance. **<sup>37</sup>** If there is famine in the land, if there is pestilence, blight, mildew, locust, or caterpillar; if their enemy besieges them in the land at their gates—whatever plague, whatever sickness there is; **<sup>38</sup>** whatever prayer or supplication is made by any man or by all your people Israel, each knowing the affliction of his own heart and spreading out his hands toward this house, **<sup>39</sup>** then hear in heaven your dwelling place and forgive and act and give to each man according to all his ways, whose heart you know—for you alone know the hearts of all the sons of men— **<sup>40</sup>** that they may fear you all the days that they live in the land that you gave to our fathers. **<sup>41</sup>** Moreover, concerning a foreigner who is not of your people Israel, but comes from a distant land for the sake of your name— **<sup>42</sup>** for they shall hear of your great name and your mighty hand and your outstretched arm—when he comes and prays toward this house, **<sup>43</sup>** hear in heaven your dwelling place and do according to all for which the foreigner calls to you, that all the peoples of the earth may know your name and fear you, as do your people Israel, and that they may know that this house that I have built is called by your name. **<sup>44</sup>** When your people go out to battle against their enemy, by whatever way you send them, and they pray to the LORD toward the city that you have chosen and the house that I have built for your name, **<sup>45</sup>** then hear in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause. **<sup>46</sup>** If they sin against you—for there is no man who does not sin—and you are angry with them and give them to an enemy, so that they are carried away captive to the land of the enemy, far off or near, **<sup>47</sup>** yet if they take it to heart in the land where they are carried captive and repent and plead with you in the land of their captivity, saying, ‘We have sinned and acted perversely and wickedly,’ **<sup>48</sup>** and if they return to you with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their enemies who took them captive, and pray to you toward their land that you gave to their fathers, the city that you have chosen, and the house that I have built for your name, **<sup>49</sup>** then hear in heaven your dwelling place their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause, **<sup>50</sup>** and forgive your people who have sinned against you, and all their transgressions that they have committed against you, and grant them compassion before those who took them captive, that they may have compassion on them. **<sup>51</sup>** For they are your people and your inheritance, whom you brought out of Egypt, from the midst of the iron furnace. **<sup>52</sup>** Let your eyes be open to the supplication of your servant and to the supplication of your people Israel, to listen to them whenever they call to you. **<sup>53</sup>** For you set them apart as your inheritance from all the peoples of the earth, as you spoke through Moses your servant, when you brought our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord GOD.”

**<sup>54</sup>** And it came to pass when Solomon had finished praying all this prayer and supplication to the LORD, he arose from before the altar of the LORD, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread out toward heaven. **<sup>55</sup>** And he stood and blessed all the assembly of Israel with a loud voice, saying, **<sup>56</sup>** “Blessed be the LORD who has given rest to his people Israel according to all that he promised. Not one word has failed of all his good promise, which he spoke by the hand of Moses his servant. **<sup>57</sup>** May the LORD our God be with us, as he was with our fathers. Let him not leave us or forsake us, **<sup>58</sup>** that he may incline our hearts to him, to walk in all his ways and to keep his commandments, his statutes, and his ordinances, which he commanded our fathers. **<sup>59</sup>** And let these words of mine, with which I have pleaded before the LORD, be near to the LORD our God day and night, that he may maintain the cause of his servant and the cause of his people Israel as each day requires, **<sup>60</sup>** so that all the peoples of the earth may know that the LORD is God; there is no other. **<sup>61</sup>** Let your heart therefore be wholly devoted to the LORD our God, to walk in his statutes and to keep his commandments, as on this day.”

**<sup>62</sup>** Then the king and all Israel with him offered sacrifice before the LORD. **<sup>63</sup>** And Solomon offered as peace offerings to the LORD twenty-two thousand oxen and one hundred twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the sons of Israel dedicated the house of the LORD.

**<sup>64</sup>** That same day the king consecrated the middle of the court that was before the house of the LORD, for there he offered the burnt offering and the grain offering and the fat of the peace offerings, because the bronze altar that was before the LORD was too small to receive the burnt offering and the grain offering and the fat of the peace offerings. **<sup>65</sup>** So Solomon held the feast at that time, and all Israel with him, a great assembly from Lebo-hamath to the Brook of Egypt, before the LORD our God, seven days and seven more days—fourteen days. **<sup>66</sup>** On the eighth day he sent the people away, and they blessed the king and went to their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the goodness that the LORD had shown to David his servant and to Israel his people. 

## Chapter 9

**<sup>1</sup>** And it came to pass, when Solomon had finished building the house of the LORD and the king’s house and all Solomon's desire which he was pleased to do, **<sup>2</sup>** that the LORD appeared to Solomon a second time, as he had appeared to him at Gibeon. **<sup>3</sup>** And the LORD said to him, “I have heard your prayer and your supplication that you made before me. I have consecrated this house that you have built, to put my name there forever, and my eyes and my heart shall be there all the days. **<sup>4</sup>** And as for you, if you walk before me as David your father walked, with integrity of heart and uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded you, and keep my statutes and my ordinances, **<sup>5</sup>** then I will establish the throne of your kingdom over Israel forever, as I promised David your father, saying, ‘You shall not lack a man on the throne of Israel.’ **<sup>6</sup>** But if you or your sons indeed turn away from following me, and do not keep my commandments and my statutes which I have set before you, but go and serve other gods and bow down to them, **<sup>7</sup>** then I will cut off Israel from the land that I have given them, and this house that I have consecrated for my name I will cast out of my sight, and Israel shall become a proverb and a byword among all peoples. **<sup>8</sup>** And this house shall become a heap of stones; everyone who passes by it shall be appalled and hiss and say, ‘Why has the LORD done thus to this land and to this house?’ **<sup>9</sup>** And they will say, ‘Because they abandoned the LORD their God, who brought their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods and bowed down to them and served them. Therefore the LORD brought all this evil upon them.’”

**<sup>10</sup>** And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, in which Solomon had built the two houses, the house of the LORD and the king’s house— **<sup>11</sup>** Hiram king of Tyre had supplied Solomon with cedar trees and fir trees and with gold, according to all his desire—then King Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee. **<sup>12</sup>** And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities that Solomon had given him, but they did not please him. **<sup>13</sup>** And he said, “What kind of cities are these that you have given me, my brother?” And he called them the land of Cabul to this day. **<sup>14</sup>** And Hiram had sent to the king one hundred twenty talents of gold.

**<sup>15</sup>** And this is the account of the forced labor that King Solomon levied, to build the house of the LORD and his own house and the Millo and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor and Megiddo and Gezer. **<sup>16</sup>** (Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up and taken Gezer and burned it with fire and killed the Canaanites who lived in the city, and had given it as a dowry to his daughter, Solomon’s wife.) **<sup>17</sup>** And Solomon built Gezer and Lower Beth-horon, **<sup>18</sup>** and Baalath and Tamar in the wilderness in the land, **<sup>19</sup>** and all the store cities that Solomon had, and the cities for his chariots and the cities for his horsemen, and what Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem and in Lebanon and in all the land of his dominion.

**<sup>20</sup>** All the people who were left of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, who were not of the sons of Israel— **<sup>21</sup>** their descendants who were left after them in the land, whom the sons of Israel were not able to devote to destruction—Solomon made them slaves for forced labor to this day. **<sup>22</sup>** But of the sons of Israel, Solomon made no slaves; they were the men of war and his servants and his princes and his captains and commanders of his chariots and his horsemen.

**<sup>23</sup>** These were the chief officers who were over Solomon’s work, five hundred fifty, who ruled over the people who did the work.

**<sup>24</sup>** But Pharaoh’s daughter came up out of the city of David to her house that Solomon had built for her. Then he built the Millo. **<sup>25</sup>** And three times in the year Solomon offered burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar that he built to the LORD, burning incense with them before the LORD. So he completed the house.

**<sup>26</sup>** And King Solomon built a fleet of ships at Ezion-geber, which is beside Eloth on the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Edom. **<sup>27</sup>** And Hiram sent his servants with the fleet, seamen who knew the sea, with the servants of Solomon. **<sup>28</sup>** And they went to Ophir and took from there four hundred twenty talents of gold, and brought it to King Solomon. 

## Chapter 10

**<sup>1</sup>** Now the Queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the LORD, and she came to test him with hard questions. **<sup>2</sup>** And she came to Jerusalem with a very great retinue, with camels bearing spices and large quantities of gold and precious stones. And when she came to Solomon, she spoke with him about all that was in her heart. **<sup>3</sup>** And Solomon answered all her questions; there was nothing hidden from the king that he did not explain to her. **<sup>4</sup>** And when the Queen of Sheba saw all the wisdom of Solomon, the house that he had built, **<sup>5</sup>** the food of his table, the seating of his servants, the attendance of his ministers and their apparel, his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up to the house of the LORD, there was no more spirit in her.

**<sup>6</sup>** And she said to the king, “The report was true that I heard in my own land of your words and of your wisdom. **<sup>7</sup>** But I did not believe the reports until I came and saw it with my own eyes. And yet, the half was not told me; your wisdom and prosperity exceed the report that I heard. **<sup>8</sup>** How happy your men are! Happy are your servants who continually stand before you and hear your wisdom! **<sup>9</sup>** Blessed be the LORD your God, who has delighted in you and set you on the throne of Israel! Because the LORD loves Israel forever, he has made you king, that you may execute justice and righteousness.”

**<sup>10</sup>** Then she gave the king one hundred twenty talents of gold and a very great quantity of spices and precious stones. Never again such abundance of spices as these came to Israel that the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.

**<sup>11</sup>** And the fleet of Hiram that brought gold from Ophir also brought from Ophir a great quantity of almug wood and precious stones. **<sup>12</sup>** And the king made from the almug wood supports for the house of the LORD and for the king’s house, also lyres and harps for the singers. No such almug wood has come or been seen to this day.

**<sup>13</sup>** And King Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all she desired, whatever she asked, besides what was given her by the hand of King Solomon. Then she returned and went back to her own land, she and her servants.

**<sup>14</sup>** Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred sixty-six talents of gold, **<sup>15</sup>** besides what came from the traders and the traffic of the merchants, and from all the kings of Arabia and the governors of the land.

**<sup>16</sup>** And King Solomon made two hundred large shields of beaten gold; six hundred shekels of gold went into each shield. **<sup>17</sup>** And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three minas of gold went into each shield. And the king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebanon. **<sup>18</sup>** And the king made a great throne of ivory and overlaid it with the finest gold. **<sup>19</sup>** The throne had six steps, and the throne had a rounded top at the back, and armrests on each side of the seat, and two lions standing beside the armrests, **<sup>20</sup>** and twelve lions were standing there on the six steps, one on each side of the step. Nothing like it had been made for any kingdom. **<sup>21</sup>** All King Solomon’s drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the House of the Forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; none were of silver—it was not considered of any value in the days of Solomon. **<sup>22</sup>** For the king had a fleet of ships of Tarshish at sea with the fleet of Hiram. Once every three years the fleet of Tarshish came, bringing gold, silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.

**<sup>23</sup>** So King Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in riches and in wisdom. **<sup>24</sup>** And the whole earth sought the presence of Solomon to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart. **<sup>25</sup>** And they brought every man his tribute, vessels of silver and vessels of gold, garments, weapons, spices, horses, and mules, a set amount year by year. **<sup>26</sup>** And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen; he had one thousand four hundred chariots and twelve thousand horsemen, whom he stationed in the chariot cities and with the king in Jerusalem. **<sup>27</sup>** And the king made silver as common in Jerusalem as stones, and he made cedars as plentiful as the sycamore trees that are in the Shephelah. **<sup>28</sup>** And Solomon imported horses from Egypt and from Kue, and the king’s merchants received them from Kue for a price. **<sup>29</sup>** And a chariot could be imported from Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for one hundred fifty; and so they were exported to all the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram by their hand. 

## Chapter 11

**<sup>1</sup>** Now King Solomon loved many foreign women, besides the daughter of Pharaoh: Moabite, Ammonite, Edomite, Sidonian, and Hittite women, **<sup>2</sup>** from the nations concerning which the LORD had said to the sons of Israel, “You shall not go among them, and they shall not come among you, for surely they will turn your heart after their gods.” But Solomon clung to them in love. **<sup>3</sup>** He had seven hundred wives, all princesses, and three hundred concubines, and his wives turned his heart away from God. **<sup>4</sup>** For when Solomon was old, his wives turned his heart after other gods, and his heart was not wholly devoted to the LORD his God, as the heart of David his father had been.

**<sup>5</sup>** For Solomon went after Ashtoreth, the goddess of the Sidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites. **<sup>6</sup>** And Solomon did what was evil in the sight of the LORD and did not fully follow the LORD as David his father had done. **<sup>7</sup>** Then Solomon built a high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab on the mountain which is east of Jerusalem, and for Molech the abomination of the sons of Ammon. **<sup>8</sup>** And thus he did for all his foreign wives, who burned incense and sacrificed to their gods.

**<sup>9</sup>** Now the LORD was angry with Solomon because his heart had turned away from the LORD, the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice **<sup>10</sup>** and had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods. But he did not obey what the LORD had commanded. **<sup>11</sup>** Therefore the LORD said to Solomon, “Since this has been your practice and you have not kept My covenant and My statutes which I have commanded you, I will surely tear the kingdom from you and give it to your servant. **<sup>12</sup>** However, I will not do it in your days, for the sake of David your father. Rather, I will tear it out of the hand of your son. **<sup>13</sup>** Yet I will not tear away all the kingdom, but I will give one tribe to your son, for the sake of David My servant and for the sake of Jerusalem which I have chosen.”

**<sup>14</sup>** Then the LORD raised up an adversary to Solomon, Hadad the Edomite. He was of the royal line in Edom. **<sup>15</sup>** For it came to pass when David was in Edom, and Joab the commander of the army had gone up to bury the slain, that he had struck down every male in Edom— **<sup>16</sup>** for Joab and all Israel remained there six months, until he had cut off every male in Edom— **<sup>17</sup>** but Hadad fled to Egypt, he and certain Edomites of his father’s servants with him, Hadad being yet a little child. **<sup>18</sup>** They set out from Midian and came to Paran, and they took men with them from Paran and came to Egypt, to Pharaoh king of Egypt, who gave him a house and assigned him food and gave him land. **<sup>19</sup>** And Hadad found great favor in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he allowed him to marry the sister of his own wife—the sister of Tahpenes the queen. **<sup>20</sup>** And the sister of Tahpenes bore to him Genubath, his son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh’s house. And Genubath was in Pharaoh’s house among the sons of Pharaoh. **<sup>21</sup>** But when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers, and that Joab the commander of the army was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh, “Let me depart, that I may go to my own country.” **<sup>22</sup>** Then Pharaoh said to him, “But what have you lacked with me, that you now seek to go to your own country?” And he said, “Let me go, please.”

**<sup>23</sup>** God also raised up another adversary to him, Rezon the son of Eliada, who had fled from his master Hadadezer king of Zobah. **<sup>24</sup>** He gathered men to himself and became leader of a band when David killed the Syrians. And they went to Damascus and dwelt there and reigned in Damascus. **<sup>25</sup>** He was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon, along with the evil that Hadad did. And he loathed Israel and reigned over Aram.

**<sup>26</sup>** Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephraimite of Zeredah, a servant of Solomon whose mother’s name was Zeruah, a widow, also lifted up his hand against the king. **<sup>27</sup>** And this was the reason why he lifted up his hand against the king: Solomon built the Millo and closed up the breach of the city of David, his father. **<sup>28</sup>** And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valor, and Solomon saw that the young man was industrious, so he appointed him over all the forced labor of the house of Joseph.

**<sup>29</sup>** At that time, when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him on the road. Now Ahijah had clothed himself with a new garment, and the two of them were alone in the field. **<sup>30</sup>** Then Ahijah took hold of the new garment that was on him and tore it into twelve pieces. **<sup>31</sup>** And he said to Jeroboam, “Take ten pieces for yourself. For thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘Look, I am about to tear the kingdom from the hand of Solomon and will give you ten tribes. **<sup>32</sup>** But he shall have one tribe for the sake of My servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city that I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel— **<sup>33</sup>** because they have forsaken Me and have worshiped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the god of Moab, and Milcom the god of the Ammonites, and they have not walked in My ways, to do what is right in My eyes and to keep My statutes and My judgments, as David his father did. **<sup>34</sup>** Nevertheless I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand, but I will make him ruler all the days of his life for the sake of David My servant whom I chose, who kept My commandments and My statutes. **<sup>35</sup>** But I will take the kingdom out of his son’s hand and give it to you, ten tribes. **<sup>36</sup>** And to his son I will give one tribe, that My servant David may always have a lamp before Me in Jerusalem, the city where I have chosen to put My name. **<sup>37</sup>** And I will take you, and you shall reign over all that your soul desires, and you shall be king over Israel. **<sup>38</sup>** And if you will listen to all that I command you and walk in My ways and do what is right in My sight by keeping My statutes and My commandments, as David My servant did, then I will be with you and build you a sure house, as I built for David, and I will give Israel to you. **<sup>39</sup>** And I will afflict the offspring of David because of this—but not forever.’”

**<sup>40</sup>** Because of this, Solomon sought to kill Jeroboam. But Jeroboam arose and fled to Egypt, to live with Shishak, king of Egypt, and was in Egypt until Solomon’s death.

**<sup>41</sup>** Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all that he did, and his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon? **<sup>42</sup>** And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years. **<sup>43</sup>** And Solomon slept with his fathers and was buried in the city of David, his father. And Rehoboam his son reigned in his place. 

## Chapter 12

**<sup>1</sup>** And Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel had come to Shechem to make him king. **<sup>2</sup>** And when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard of it—for he was still in Egypt, where he had fled from King Solomon—Jeroboam returned from Egypt. **<sup>3</sup>** And they sent and called him, and Jeroboam and all the assembly of Israel came and said to Rehoboam, **<sup>4</sup>** “Your father made our yoke heavy. Now, therefore, lighten the hard service of your father and his heavy yoke which he placed on us, and we will serve you.” **<sup>5</sup>** So he said to them, “Depart for three days, then return to me.” And the people departed.

**<sup>6</sup>** Then King Rehoboam consulted the elders who had stood before Solomon, his father, while he was alive, saying, “How do you advise me to answer this people?” **<sup>7</sup>** And they spoke to him, saying, “If today you will be a servant to this people and serve them, and speak good words to them when you answer them, then they will be your servants forever.” **<sup>8</sup>** But he abandoned the counsel that the elders had given him and consulted the young men who had grown up with him and stood before him. **<sup>9</sup>** And he said to them, “What do you advise, that we should answer this people who have spoken to me, saying, ‘Lighten the yoke that your father placed on us’?” **<sup>10</sup>** And the young men who had grown up with him said to him, “Thus shall you say to this people who said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you lighten it for us’—thus shall you say to them: ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s loins. **<sup>11</sup>** And now, whereas my father laid on you a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. My father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with scorpions.’”

**<sup>12</sup>** So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third day, as the king had directed, saying, “Return to me on the third day.” **<sup>13</sup>** And the king answered the people harshly, and he forsook the counsel that the elders had given him. **<sup>14</sup>** And he spoke to them according to the counsel of the young men, saying, “My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke. My father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with scorpions.” **<sup>15</sup>** So the king did not listen to the people, for this turn of events was from the LORD, that He might establish His word which the LORD spoke by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

**<sup>16</sup>** And when all Israel saw that the king did not listen to them, the people answered the king, saying,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“What portion do we have in David?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We have no inheritance in the son of Jesse.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To your tents, O Israel!<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Now look to your own house, David.”<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So Israel went to their tents.<br/>
**<sup>17</sup>** But as for the sons of Israel who lived in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them. **<sup>18</sup>** And when King Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the forced labor, all Israel stoned him to death with stones. Then King Rehoboam had to hurry to mount his chariot to flee to Jerusalem. **<sup>19</sup>** Thus Israel has been in rebellion against the house of David to this day.

**<sup>20</sup>** And then, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam had come back, they sent and called him to the assembly and made him king over all Israel. No one followed the house of David, except only the tribe of Judah. **<sup>21</sup>** And when Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin, one hundred and eighty thousand chosen warriors, to fight against the house of Israel, to restore the kingdom to Rehoboam the son of Solomon. **<sup>22</sup>** But the word of God came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying, **<sup>23</sup>** “Say to Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the rest of the people, **<sup>24</sup>** ‘Thus says the LORD, “You shall not go up or fight against your brothers, the sons of Israel. Everyone, return to your houses, for this happened because of Me.”’” So they listened to the word of the LORD and went home, according to the word of the LORD.

**<sup>25</sup>** Then Jeroboam built up Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim and lived there. And he went out from there and built up Penuel. **<sup>26</sup>** Then Jeroboam thought to himself, “Now the kingdom will return to the house of David. **<sup>27</sup>** If this people goes up to offer sacrifices in the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, then the heart of this people will return to their lord, to Rehoboam king of Judah, and they will kill me and return to Rehoboam king of Judah.” **<sup>28</sup>** So the king took counsel and made two calves of gold. And he said to the people, “You have gone up to Jerusalem long enough. Behold your gods, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt.” **<sup>29</sup>** And he set up one in Bethel, and the other he put in Dan. **<sup>30</sup>** And this thing became a sin, for the people went as far as Dan to worship before them. **<sup>31</sup>** He also made temples on high places and appointed priests from among any of the people, who were not of the sons of Levi. **<sup>32</sup>** And Jeroboam instituted a feast on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, like the feast that is in Judah, and he offered sacrifices on the altar. So he did in Bethel, sacrificing to the calves that he had made. And he placed in Bethel the priests of the high places that he had made. **<sup>33</sup>** Then he went up to the altar that he had made in Bethel on the fifteenth day in the eighth month, in the month that he had devised in his own heart. And he instituted a feast for the sons of Israel and went up to the altar to make offerings. 

## Chapter 13

**<sup>1</sup>** And behold, a man of God came from Judah to Bethel by the word of the LORD, while Jeroboam was standing by the altar to offer incense. **<sup>2</sup>** And he cried out against the altar by the word of the LORD and said, “O altar, altar! Thus says the LORD: Look! A son shall be born to the house of David, Josiah by name, and he shall sacrifice upon you the priests of the high places who burn incense on you, and men’s bones shall be burned on you.’” **<sup>3</sup>** And he gave a sign that same day, saying, “This is the sign that the LORD has spoken: the altar shall be torn down, and the ashes that are on it shall be poured out.”

**<sup>4</sup>** And it came to pass, when the king heard the word of the man of God, which he cried out against the altar at Bethel, that Jeroboam stretched out his hand from the altar, saying, “Seize him!” And his hand, which he stretched out against him, withered, so that he could not draw it back to himself. **<sup>5</sup>** The altar also was torn down, and the ashes poured out from the altar, according to the sign that the man of God had given by the word of the LORD. **<sup>6</sup>** Then the king said to the man of God, “Entreat now the favor of the LORD your God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored to me.” And the man of God prayed to LORD, and the king’s hand was restored to him and became as it was before. **<sup>7</sup>** And the king said to the man of God, “Come home with me and refresh yourself, and I will give you a reward.” **<sup>8</sup>** But the man of God said to the king, “If you were to give me half your house, I would not go in with you, nor would I eat bread or drink water in this place. **<sup>9</sup>** For so it was commanded me by the word of the LORD, saying, ‘You shall eat no bread, nor drink water, nor return by the way that you came.’” **<sup>10</sup>** So he went another way and did not return by the way that he came to Bethel.

**<sup>11</sup>** Now there was a certain old prophet living in Bethel, and his sons came and told him all the deeds that the man of God had done that day in Bethel. They also told their father the words that he had spoken to the king. **<sup>12</sup>** And their father said to them, “Which way did he go?” Now his sons had seen the way the man of God who came from Judah had gone. **<sup>13</sup>** And he said to his sons, “Saddle the donkey for me.” So they saddled the donkey for him, and he mounted it. **<sup>14</sup>** And he went after the man of God and found him sitting under an oak. And he said to him, “Are you the man of God who came from Judah?” And he said, “I am.” **<sup>15</sup>** Then he said to him, “Come home with me and eat bread.” **<sup>16</sup>** But he said, “I may not return with you or go in with you, nor will I eat bread or drink water with you in this place. **<sup>17</sup>** For it was said to me by the word of the LORD, ‘You shall eat no bread and drink no water there, and do not return by the way that you came.’” **<sup>18</sup>** And he said to him, “I also am a prophet like you, and an angel spoke to me by the word of the LORD, saying, ‘Bring him back with you into your house, that he may eat bread and drink water.’” But he lied to him. **<sup>19</sup>** So he went back with him and ate bread in his house and drank water.

**<sup>20</sup>** And it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of the LORD came to the prophet who had brought him back. **<sup>21</sup>** And he cried out to the man of God who had come from Judah, saying, “Thus says the LORD, ‘Because you have disobeyed the mouth of the LORD and have not kept the command that the LORD your God commanded you, **<sup>22</sup>** but came back and have eaten bread and drunk water in the place of which He said to you, “Eat no bread and drink no water,” your body shall not come to the tomb of your fathers.’” **<sup>23</sup>** And after he had eaten bread and drunk, he saddled the donkey for the prophet whom he had brought back. **<sup>24</sup>** And as he went on his way, a lion met him on the road and killed him, and his body was thrown in the road, and the donkey stood beside it; the lion also stood beside the body. **<sup>25</sup>** And it happened that men passed by and saw the body thrown in the road, and the lion standing beside the body. And they came and told about it in the city where the old prophet lived.

**<sup>26</sup>** And when the prophet who had brought him back from the way heard of it, he said, “It is the man of God who disobeyed the word of the LORD; therefore the LORD has given him to the lion, which has torn him and killed him, according to the word that the LORD spoke to him.” **<sup>27</sup>** And he said to his sons, “Saddle the donkey for me.” And they saddled it. **<sup>28</sup>** And he went and found his body thrown in the road, with the donkey and the lion standing beside the body. The lion had not eaten the body or torn the donkey. **<sup>29</sup>** And the prophet took up the body of the man of God and laid it on the donkey and brought it back, and he came to the city of the old prophet to mourn and to bury him. **<sup>30</sup>** And he laid the body in his own grave, and they mourned over him, saying, “Alas, my brother!” **<sup>31</sup>** And after he had buried him, he said to his sons, “When I die, bury me in the grave where the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his bones. **<sup>32</sup>** For the saying that he cried out by the word of the LORD against the altar in Bethel and against all the houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria shall surely come to pass.”

**<sup>33</sup>** After this event Jeroboam did not turn from his evil way, but again he made priests of the high places from among all the people. Anyone who desired it, he consecrated, and he became one of the priests of the high places. **<sup>34</sup>** And this thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam, so as to cut it off and destroy it from the face of the earth. 

## Chapter 14

**<sup>1</sup>** At that time Abijah, the son of Jeroboam, became sick. **<sup>2</sup>** And Jeroboam said to his wife, “Arise, and disguise yourself, so that you will not be recognized as the wife of Jeroboam, and go to Shiloh. Ahijah the prophet is there, who spoke concerning me that I would be king over this people. **<sup>3</sup>** Take with you ten loaves, cakes, and a jar of honey, and go to him. He will tell you what will happen to the boy.” **<sup>4</sup>** And Jeroboam’s wife did so. She arose and went to Shiloh and came to the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah could not see, for his eyes were dim because of his age.

**<sup>5</sup>** And the LORD said to Ahijah, “Know that the wife of Jeroboam is coming to inquire of you concerning her son, for he is sick. You shall say thus and thus to her, for it will be when she comes in that she will pretend to be another woman.” **<sup>6</sup>** And it came to pass, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet as she came in at the door, he said, “Come in, wife of Jeroboam. Why do you pretend to be another? For I am charged with hard news for you. **<sup>7</sup>** Go, tell Jeroboam, ‘Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Because I exalted you from among the people and made you ruler over My people Israel, **<sup>8</sup>** and tore the kingdom away from the house of David and gave it to you—and yet you have not been like My servant David, who kept My commandments and followed Me with all his heart, to do only that which was right in My eyes— **<sup>9</sup>** but you have done more evil than all who were before you, and have gone and made for yourself other gods and metal images, to provoke Me to anger, and have cast Me behind your back— **<sup>10</sup>** therefore, I am bringing disaster upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam every male, both bond and free in Israel, and will burn up the house of Jeroboam as a man burns up dung until it is gone. **<sup>11</sup>** Anyone belonging to Jeroboam who dies in the city the dogs shall eat, and anyone who dies in the field the birds of the heavens shall eat, for the LORD has spoken it.’”

**<sup>12</sup>** “Arise therefore, go to your house. When your feet enter the city, the child shall die. **<sup>13</sup>** And all Israel shall mourn for him and bury him, for he alone of Jeroboam’s family shall come to the grave, because in him there is found something pleasing to the LORD, the God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam. **<sup>14</sup>** Moreover, the LORD will raise up for Himself a king over Israel who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam this day—and now even! **<sup>15</sup>** And the LORD will strike Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water, and He will uproot Israel from this good land that He gave to their fathers and will scatter them beyond the River, because they have made their Asherim, provoking the LORD to anger. **<sup>16</sup>** And He will give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, which he sinned and made Israel to sin.”

**<sup>17</sup>** Then Jeroboam’s wife arose and departed and came to Tirzah. And as she was entering the threshold of the house, the child died. **<sup>18</sup>** And they buried him, and all Israel mourned for him, according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke by His servant Ahijah the prophet.

**<sup>19</sup>** Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he fought and how he reigned, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel. **<sup>20</sup>** And the days that Jeroboam reigned were twenty-two years, and he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son reigned in his place.

**<sup>21</sup>** Now Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city that the LORD had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to put His name there. His mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonite. **<sup>22</sup>** And Judah did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, and they provoked Him to jealousy with their sins which they committed, more than all that their fathers had done. **<sup>23</sup>** For they also built for themselves high places and pillars and Asherim on every high hill and under every green tree, **<sup>24</sup>** and there were also male cult prostitutes in the land. They did according to all the abominations of the nations that the LORD had driven out before the sons of Israel.

**<sup>25</sup>** And it came to pass in the fifth year of King Rehoboam that Shishak, king of Egypt, came up against Jerusalem. **<sup>26</sup>** And he took away the treasures of the house of the LORD and the treasures of the king’s house. He took everything. He also took away all the shields of gold that Solomon had made. **<sup>27</sup>** And King Rehoboam made in their place shields of bronze and committed them to the hands of the officers of the guard, who kept the door of the king’s house. **<sup>28</sup>** And whenever the king went into the house of the LORD, the guard carried them and then brought them back to the guardroom.

**<sup>29</sup>** Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? **<sup>30</sup>** And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually. **<sup>31</sup>** And Rehoboam slept with his fathers and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. His mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonite. And Abijam his son reigned in his place. 

## Chapter 15

**<sup>1</sup>** Now in the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam the son of Nebat, Abijam became king over Judah. **<sup>2</sup>** He reigned for three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom. **<sup>3</sup>** And he walked in all the sins of his father which he had committed before him, and his heart was not fully devoted to the LORD his God, as was the heart of his father David. **<sup>4</sup>** Nevertheless, for David’s sake the LORD his God gave him a lamp in Jerusalem, to raise up his son after him and to establish Jerusalem, **<sup>5</sup>** because David did what was right in the eyes of the LORD and did not turn aside from anything that He commanded him all the days of his life, except in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.

**<sup>6</sup>** Now there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of his life. **<sup>7</sup>** And the rest of the acts of Abijam and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam. **<sup>8</sup>** And Abijam slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David, and Asa his son reigned in his place.

**<sup>9</sup>** In the twentieth year of Jeroboam, king of Israel, Asa became king over Judah. **<sup>10</sup>** And he reigned forty-one years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom. **<sup>11</sup>** And Asa did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, as David his father had done. **<sup>12</sup>** He put away the male cult prostitutes from the land and removed all the idols that his fathers had made. **<sup>13</sup>** He also removed Maacah, his mother, from being queen mother, because she had made an abominable image for Asherah. And Asa cut down her image and burned it at the brook Kidron. **<sup>14</sup>** But the high places were not removed. Nevertheless, Asa’s heart was fully devoted to the LORD all his days. **<sup>15</sup>** And he brought into the house of the LORD the sacred gifts of his father and his own sacred gifts—silver and gold and vessels.

**<sup>16</sup>** Now there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days. **<sup>17</sup>** And Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah and built Ramah, to prevent anyone from going out or coming in to Asa king of Judah. **<sup>18</sup>** Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that was left in the treasuries of the house of the LORD and the treasuries of the king’s house and gave them into the hands of his servants. And King Asa sent them to Ben-hadad the son of Tabrimmon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, who lived in Damascus, saying, **<sup>19</sup>** “Let there be a covenant between me and you, as there was between my father and your father. I am sending you a present of silver and gold. Go, break your covenant with Baasha king of Israel, so that he may withdraw from me.” **<sup>20</sup>** So Ben-hadad listened to King Asa and sent the commanders of his armies against the cities of Israel. And he struck Ijon, Dan, Abel-beth-maacah, and all Chinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali. **<sup>21</sup>** And when Baasha heard of it, he stopped building Ramah and remained in Tirzah. **<sup>22</sup>** Then King Asa made a proclamation to all Judah—none was exempt—and they carried away the stones of Ramah and its timber, with which Baasha had been building, and with them King Asa built Geba of Benjamin and Mizpah.

**<sup>23</sup>** Now the rest of all the acts of Asa and all his might and all that he did and the cities that he built, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? But in his old age he was diseased in his feet. **<sup>24</sup>** And Asa slept with his fathers and was buried with them in the city of David his father, and Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his place.

**<sup>25</sup>** Now Nadab the son of Jeroboam became king over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah, and he reigned over Israel two years. **<sup>26</sup>** And he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD and walked in the way of his father and in his sin which he caused Israel to commit. **<sup>27</sup>** And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, conspired against him, and Baasha struck him down at Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines—for Nadab and all Israel were besieging Gibbethon— **<sup>28</sup>** and Baasha killed him in the third year of Asa king of Judah and reigned in his place. **<sup>29</sup>** And as soon as he became king, he struck down all the house of Jeroboam. He did not leave to Jeroboam anyone who breathed, but he destroyed them, according to the word of the LORD that He spoke by His servant Ahijah the Shilonite, **<sup>30</sup>** because of the sins of Jeroboam that he committed and that he made Israel to sin, and because of the anger to which he provoked the LORD, the God of Israel.

**<sup>31</sup>** Now the rest of the acts of Nadab and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? **<sup>32</sup>** And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.

**<sup>33</sup>** In the third year of Asa king of Judah, Baasha the son of Ahijah became king over all Israel at Tirzah, and he reigned twenty-four years. **<sup>34</sup>** And he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD and walked in the way of Jeroboam and in his sin which he caused Israel to commit. 

## Chapter 16

**<sup>1</sup>** And the word of the LORD came to Jehu the son of Hanani against Baasha, saying, **<sup>2</sup>** “Because I raised you up out of the dust and made you leader over My people Israel, and you have walked in the way of Jeroboam and have caused My people Israel to sin, provoking Me to anger with their sins, **<sup>3</sup>** therefore, I will utterly sweep away Baasha and his house, and I will make your house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. **<sup>4</sup>** Anyone belonging to Baasha who dies in the city the dogs shall eat, and anyone who dies in the field the birds of the heavens shall eat.”

**<sup>5</sup>** Now the rest of the acts of Baasha and what he did and his might, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? **<sup>6</sup>** And Baasha slept with his fathers and was buried at Tirzah, and Elah his son reigned in his place. **<sup>7</sup>** Moreover, the word of the LORD came by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani against Baasha and his house, both because of all the evil that he did in the sight of the LORD, provoking Him to anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam, and also because he struck it down.

**<sup>8</sup>** In the twenty-sixth year of Asa king of Judah, Elah the son of Baasha began to reign over Israel in Tirzah, and he reigned two years. **<sup>9</sup>** But his servant Zimri, commander of half his chariots, conspired against him. While he was at Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza, who was over the household in Tirzah, **<sup>10</sup>** Zimri came in and struck him down and killed him in the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his place.

**<sup>11</sup>** And when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on his throne, he struck down all the house of Baasha. He did not leave him a single male, either of his relatives or of his friends. **<sup>12</sup>** Thus Zimri destroyed all the house of Baasha, according to the word of the LORD that He spoke against Baasha by Jehu the prophet, **<sup>13</sup>** for all the sins of Baasha and the sins of Elah his son, which they committed, and which they caused Israel to sin, provoking the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger with their idols. **<sup>14</sup>** Now the rest of the acts of Elah and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?

**<sup>15</sup>** In the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, Zimri reigned seven days in Tirzah. Now the troops were encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines. **<sup>16</sup>** And the troops who were encamped heard it said, “Zimri has conspired, and he has also struck down the king.” Therefore all Israel made Omri, the commander of the army, king over Israel that day in the camp. **<sup>17</sup>** So Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah. **<sup>18</sup>** And when Zimri saw that the city was taken, he went into the citadel of the king’s house and burned the king’s house over him with fire and died, **<sup>19</sup>** because of his sins that he committed, doing what was evil in the sight of the LORD, walking in the way of Jeroboam, and for the sin that he committed, making Israel to sin. **<sup>20</sup>** Now the rest of the acts of Zimri and the conspiracy that he made, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?

**<sup>21</sup>** Then the people of Israel were divided into two parts. Half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king, and half followed Omri. **<sup>22</sup>** But the people who followed Omri prevailed over the people who followed Tibni the son of Ginath. So Tibni died, and Omri became king. **<sup>23</sup>** In the thirty-first year of Asa king of Judah, Omri began to reign over Israel, and he reigned twelve years. He reigned six years in Tirzah. **<sup>24</sup>** He bought the hill of Samaria from Shemer for two talents of silver, and he built on the hill and called the name of the city that he built Samaria, after the name of Shemer, the owner of the hill.

**<sup>25</sup>** Omri did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, and did more evil than all who were before him. **<sup>26</sup>** For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in the sins that he made Israel to sin, provoking the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger by their idols. **<sup>27</sup>** Now the rest of the acts of Omri that he did, and the might that he showed, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? **<sup>28</sup>** And Omri slept with his fathers and was buried in Samaria, and Ahab his son reigned in his place.

**<sup>29</sup>** In the thirty-eighth year of Asa king of Judah, Ahab the son of Omri began to reign over Israel. And Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty-two years. **<sup>30</sup>** And Ahab the son of Omri did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, more than all who were before him. **<sup>31</sup>** And as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, he took as his wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Sidonians, and went and served Baal and worshiped him. **<sup>32</sup>** He erected an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he built in Samaria. **<sup>33</sup>** And Ahab made an Asherah. Ahab did more to provoke the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger than all the kings of Israel who were before him.

**<sup>34</sup>** In his days Hiel of Bethel built Jericho. He laid its foundation at the cost of Abiram his firstborn and set up its gates at the cost of his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke by Joshua the son of Nun. 

## Chapter 17

**<sup>1</sup>** And Elijah the Tishbite, of the inhabitants of Gilead, said to Ahab, “As the LORD, the God of Israel, lives, before whom I stand, there shall be neither dew nor rain these years, except by my word.”

**<sup>2</sup>** And the word of the LORD came to him, saying, **<sup>3</sup>** “Depart from here and turn eastward, and hide yourself by the brook Cherith, which is east of the Jordan. **<sup>4</sup>** And it shall be that you shall drink from the brook, and I have commanded the ravens to provide for you there.” **<sup>5</sup>** So he went and did according to the word of the LORD. He went and lived by the brook Cherith, which is east of the Jordan. **<sup>6</sup>** And the ravens brought him bread and meat in the morning, and bread and meat in the evening, and he drank from the brook. **<sup>7</sup>** And after some time the brook dried up, because there was no rain in the land.

**<sup>8</sup>** Then the word of the LORD came to him, saying, **<sup>9</sup>** “Arise, go to Zarephath, which belongs to Sidon, and dwell there. Behold, I have commanded a widow there to provide for you.” **<sup>10</sup>** So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, a widow was there gathering sticks. And he called to her and said, “Please bring me a little water in a vessel, that I may drink.” **<sup>11</sup>** And as she was going to bring it, he called to her and said, “Please bring me a piece of bread in your hand.” **<sup>12</sup>** And she said, “As the LORD your God lives, I have nothing baked—only a handful of flour in the jar and a little oil in the jug. And now I am gathering a couple of sticks, that I may go in and prepare it for myself and my son, that we may eat it and die.” **<sup>13</sup>** And Elijah said to her, “Do not fear. Go and do as you have said. But first make me a little cake from it and bring it to me, and afterward make some for yourself and your son. **<sup>14</sup>** For thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘The jar of flour shall not be used up, and the jug of oil shall not run dry, until the day the LORD sends rain on the earth.’” **<sup>15</sup>** So she went and did as Elijah said. And she and he and her household ate for many days. **<sup>16</sup>** The jar of flour was not used up, nor did the jug of oil run dry, according to the word of the LORD that He spoke by Elijah.

**<sup>17</sup>** And after these things the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, became ill. And his illness was so severe that there was no breath left in him. **<sup>18</sup>** And she said to Elijah, “What have I to do with you, O man of God? Have you come to me to bring my sin to remembrance and to put my son to death?” **<sup>19</sup>** And he said to her, “Give me your son.” And he took him from her arms and carried him up into the upper chamber where he was staying, and laid him on his own bed. **<sup>20</sup>** And he cried to the LORD and said, “O LORD my God, have You brought calamity even upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by killing her son?” **<sup>21</sup>** Then he stretched himself out upon the child three times and cried to the LORD and said, “O LORD my God, let this child’s life come into him again.” **<sup>22</sup>** And the LORD heard the voice of Elijah, and the life of the child came into him again, and he revived. **<sup>23</sup>** And Elijah took the child and brought him down from the upper chamber into the house and gave him to his mother. And Elijah said, “See, your son lives.”

**<sup>24</sup>** Then the woman said to Elijah, “Now I know that you are a man of God and that the word of the LORD in your mouth is truth.” 

## Chapter 18

**<sup>1</sup>** After many days the word of the LORD came to Elijah in the third year, saying, “Go, show yourself to Ahab, and I will send rain upon the land.” **<sup>2</sup>** So Elijah went to show himself to Ahab. Now the famine was severe in Samaria.

**<sup>3</sup>** And Ahab called Obadiah, who was over the household. (Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly. **<sup>4</sup>** For when Jezebel was cutting off the prophets of the LORD, Obadiah took a hundred prophets and hid them by fifties in a cave and provided them with bread and water.) **<sup>5</sup>** And Ahab said to Obadiah, “Go through the land to all the springs of water and to all the valleys. Perhaps we may find grass to save the horses and mules alive, and not lose all the animals.” **<sup>6</sup>** So they divided the land between them to pass through it. Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself.

**<sup>7</sup>** And as Obadiah was on the way, behold, Elijah met him. And he recognized him and fell on his face and said, “Is it you, my lord Elijah?” **<sup>8</sup>** And he answered him, “It is I. Go, tell your lord, ‘Behold, Elijah is here.’” **<sup>9</sup>** And he said, “What sin have I committed, that you would give your servant into the hand of Ahab, to put me to death? **<sup>10</sup>** As the LORD your God lives, there is no nation or kingdom where my lord has not sent to seek you. And when they said, ‘He is not here,’ he took an oath from the kingdom or nation that they had not found you. **<sup>11</sup>** And now you say, ‘Go, tell your lord, “Behold, Elijah is here.”’ **<sup>12</sup>** And as soon as I have gone from you, the Spirit of the LORD will carry you I know not where. And so when I come and tell Ahab and he cannot find you, he will kill me. But I your servant have feared the LORD from my youth. **<sup>13</sup>** Has it not been told to my lord what I did when Jezebel killed the prophets of the LORD, how I hid a hundred men of the LORD’s prophets by fifties in a cave and provided them with bread and water? **<sup>14</sup>** And now you say, ‘Go, tell your lord, “Behold, Elijah is here.”’ He will kill me.” **<sup>15</sup>** And Elijah said, “As the LORD of hosts lives, before whom I stand, I will surely show myself to him today.”

**<sup>16</sup>** So Obadiah went to meet Ahab and told him. And Ahab went to meet Elijah. **<sup>17</sup>** When Ahab saw Elijah, Ahab said to him, “Is it you, you troubler of Israel?” **<sup>18</sup>** And he answered, “I have not troubled Israel, but you and your father’s house have, because you have forsaken the commandments of the LORD and have followed the Baals. **<sup>19</sup>** Now therefore send and gather all Israel to me at Mount Carmel, and the four hundred fifty prophets of Baal and the four hundred prophets of Asherah who eat at Jezebel’s table.”

**<sup>20</sup>** So Ahab sent to all the sons of Israel and gathered the prophets together at Mount Carmel. **<sup>21</sup>** And Elijah came near to all the people and said, “How long will you go limping between two opinions? If the LORD is God, follow Him; but if Baal, then follow him.” But the people did not answer him a word. **<sup>22</sup>** Then Elijah said to the people, “I, even I only, am left a prophet of the LORD, but Baal’s prophets are four hundred fifty men. **<sup>23</sup>** Let two bulls be given to us, and let them choose one bull for themselves and cut it in pieces and lay it on the wood, but put no fire to it. And I will prepare the other bull and lay it on the wood and put no fire to it. **<sup>24</sup>** Then you call on the name of your god, and I will call on the name of the LORD, and the God who answers by fire—He is God.” And all the people answered and said, “It is well spoken.”

**<sup>25</sup>** Then Elijah said to the prophets of Baal, “Choose for yourselves one bull and prepare it first, for you are many, and call on the name of your god, but put no fire to it.” **<sup>26</sup>** And they took the bull that was given to them, and they prepared it and called on the name of Baal from morning until noon, saying, “O Baal, answer us!” But there was no voice, and no one answered. And they limped about the altar that they had made. **<sup>27</sup>** And at noon Elijah mocked them, saying, “Cry aloud, for he is a god. Either he is meditating, or he is relieving himself, or he is on a journey, or perhaps he is asleep and must be awakened.” **<sup>28</sup>** And they cried aloud and cut themselves after their custom with swords and lances, until the blood gushed out upon them. **<sup>29</sup>** And as midday passed, they raved on until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, but there was no voice. No one answered; no one paid attention.

**<sup>30</sup>** Then Elijah said to all the people, “Come near to me.” And all the people came near to him. And he repaired the altar of the LORD that had been torn down. **<sup>31</sup>** And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of the LORD came, saying, “Israel shall be your name.” **<sup>32</sup>** And with the stones he built an altar in the name of the LORD. And he made a trench around the altar, as great as would contain two seahs of seed. **<sup>33</sup>** And he arranged the wood and cut the bull in pieces and laid it on the wood. And he said, “Fill four jars with water and pour it on the burnt offering and on the wood.” **<sup>34</sup>** And he said, “Do it a second time,” and they did it a second time. And he said, “Do it a third time,” and they did it a third time. **<sup>35</sup>** And the water ran around the altar and filled the trench also with water.

**<sup>36</sup>** And at the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, Elijah the prophet came near and said, “O LORD, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, let it be known this day that You are the God in Israel, and that I am Your servant, and that I have done all these things at Your word. **<sup>37</sup>** Answer me, O LORD, answer me, that this people may know that You, O LORD, are God, and that You have turned their hearts back.” **<sup>38</sup>** Then the fire of the LORD fell and consumed the burnt offering and the wood and the stones and the dust, and it licked up the water that was in the trench. **<sup>39</sup>** And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces and said, “The LORD, He is God! The LORD, He is God!”

**<sup>40</sup>** And Elijah said to them, “Seize the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape.” And they seized them, and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon and slaughtered them there.

**<sup>41</sup>** And Elijah said to Ahab, “Go up, eat and drink, for there is the sound of the rushing of rain.” **<sup>42</sup>** So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Mount Carmel, and he bowed himself down on the earth and put his face between his knees. **<sup>43</sup>** And he said to his servant, “Go up now, look toward the sea.” And he went up and looked and said, “There is nothing.” And he said, “Go again,” seven times. **<sup>44</sup>** And at the seventh time he said, “Behold, a little cloud like a man’s hand is rising from the sea.” And he said, “Go up, say to Ahab, ‘Prepare your chariot and go down, lest the rain stop you.’” **<sup>45</sup>** And in a little while the heavens grew black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode and went to Jezreel. **<sup>46</sup>** And the hand of the LORD was upon Elijah, and he girded up his loins and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel. 

## Chapter 19

**<sup>1</sup>** And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and how he had killed all the prophets with the sword. **<sup>2</sup>** Then Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah, saying, “So may the gods do to me and more also, if I do not make your life like the life of one of them by this time tomorrow.” **<sup>3</sup>** Then he was afraid, and he arose and ran for his life and came to Beersheba, which belongs to Judah, and left his servant there.

**<sup>4</sup>** But he himself went a day’s journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a broom tree. And he asked that he might die, saying, “It is enough now, O LORD; take away my life, for I am no better than my fathers.” **<sup>5</sup>** And he lay down and slept under a broom tree. And then, an angel touched him and said to him, “Arise and eat.” **<sup>6</sup>** And he looked, and saw that there was at his head a cake baked on hot stones and a jar of water. And he ate and drank and lay down again. **<sup>7</sup>** And the angel of the LORD came again a second time and touched him and said, “Arise and eat, for the journey is too great for you.” **<sup>8</sup>** And he arose and ate and drank, and went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb, the mountain of God.

**<sup>9</sup>** And there he came to a cave and lodged in it. And then, the word of the LORD came to him, and He said to him, “What are you doing here, Elijah?” **<sup>10</sup>** He said, “I have been very zealous for the LORD, the God of hosts. For the sons of Israel have forsaken Your covenant, torn down Your altars, and killed Your prophets with the sword. And I, even I only, am left, and they seek my life, to take it away.” **<sup>11</sup>** And He said, “Go out and stand on the mountain before the LORD.” And he watched as the LORD passed by, and a great and strong wind tore the mountains and broke in pieces the rocks before the LORD, but the LORD was not in the wind. And after the wind an earthquake, but the LORD was not in the earthquake. **<sup>12</sup>** And after the earthquake a fire, but the LORD was not in the fire. And after the fire the sound of a still small voice. **<sup>13</sup>** And when Elijah heard it, he wrapped his face in his cloak and went out and stood at the entrance of the cave. And behold, a voice came to him and said, “What are you doing here, Elijah?” **<sup>14</sup>** He said, “I have been very zealous for the LORD, the God of hosts. For the sons of Israel have forsaken Your covenant, torn down Your altars, and killed Your prophets with the sword. And I, even I only, am left, and they seek my life, to take it away.”

**<sup>15</sup>** And the LORD said to him, “Go, return on your way to the wilderness of Damascus. And when you arrive, you shall anoint Hazael as king over Syria. **<sup>16</sup>** And Jehu the son of Nimshi you shall anoint as king over Israel, and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah you shall anoint as prophet in your place. **<sup>17</sup>** And the one who escapes from the sword of Hazael shall Jehu put to death, and the one who escapes from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha put to death. **<sup>18</sup>** Yet I have left seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth that has not kissed him.”

**<sup>19</sup>** So he departed from there and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he was with the twelfth. And Elijah passed by him and threw his cloak upon him. **<sup>20</sup>** And he left the oxen and ran after Elijah and said, “Let me kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow you.” And he said to him, “Go back again, for what have I done to you?” **<sup>21</sup>** So he returned from following him and took the yoke of oxen and slaughtered them and boiled their flesh with the yokes of the oxen and gave it to the people, and they ate. Then he arose and followed Elijah and served him. 

## Chapter 20

**<sup>1</sup>** Now Ben-hadad king of Aram gathered all his army together. Thirty-two kings were with him, along with horses and chariots. And he went up and besieged Samaria and fought against it. **<sup>2</sup>** And he sent messengers into the city to Ahab king of Israel and said to him, “Thus says Ben-hadad: **<sup>3</sup>** ‘Your silver and your gold are mine; your most beautiful wives and children are also mine.’” **<sup>4</sup>** And the king of Israel answered and said, “Just as you say, my lord the king, I and all that I have are yours.” **<sup>5</sup>** Then the messengers returned and said, “Thus says Ben-hadad: Though I have sent to you, saying, ‘You shall give me your silver and gold, your wives and your children,’ **<sup>6</sup>** yet about this time tomorrow I will send my servants to you, and they shall search your house and the houses of your servants. Whatever is desirable in your eyes, they shall take it in their hands and carry it away.”

**<sup>7</sup>** Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land and said, “Please notice and see how this man is seeking trouble. For he sent for my wives and my children, and for my silver and my gold, and I did not refuse him.” **<sup>8</sup>** And all the elders and all the people said to him, “Do not listen and do not consent.” **<sup>9</sup>** So he said to the messengers of Ben-hadad, “Tell my lord the king, ‘All that you first demanded of your servant I will do, but this I cannot do.’” And the messengers departed and brought him word again. **<sup>10</sup>** Then Ben-hadad sent to him and said, “May the gods do so to me and more also if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all the people who follow me.” **<sup>11</sup>** And the king of Israel answered and said, “Tell him, ‘Let not him who puts on his armor boast like one who takes it off.’” **<sup>12</sup>** And when Ben-hadad heard this message as he was drinking with the kings in the booths, he said to his servants, “Get ready.” And they got ready to attack the city.

**<sup>13</sup>** And behold, a prophet came near to Ahab king of Israel and said, “Thus says the LORD: Have you seen all this great multitude? Behold, I will give it into your hand this day, and you shall know that I am the LORD.” **<sup>14</sup>** And Ahab said, “By whom?” And he said, “Thus says the LORD: By the servants of the district governors.” Then he said, “Who shall begin the battle?” And he answered, “You.” **<sup>15</sup>** Then he mustered the servants of the district governors, and they were two hundred thirty-two. After them he mustered all the sons of Israel, seven thousand.

**<sup>16</sup>** And they went out at noon, while Ben-hadad was drinking himself drunk in the booths, he and the thirty-two kings who helped him. **<sup>17</sup>** And the servants of the district governors went out first. And Ben-hadad sent out scouts, and they reported to him, saying, “Men have come out from Samaria.” **<sup>18</sup>** He said, “If they have come out for peace, take them alive; and if they have come out for war, take them alive.”

**<sup>19</sup>** So these went out of the city, the servants of the district governors and the army that followed them. **<sup>20</sup>** And each struck down his man. The Arameans fled, and Israel pursued them. But Ben-hadad king of Aram escaped on a horse with horsemen. **<sup>21</sup>** And the king of Israel went out and struck the horses and chariots and struck down the Arameans with a great slaughter.

**<sup>22</sup>** Then the prophet came near to the king of Israel and said to him, “Go, strengthen yourself and consider and see what you must do, for in the spring the king of Aram will come up against you.” **<sup>23</sup>** And the servants of the king of Aram said to him, “Their god is a god of the mountains, so they were stronger than we; but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they. **<sup>24</sup>** And do this: remove the kings, each from his post, and put commanders in their places. **<sup>25</sup>** And muster an army like the army that you have lost, horse for horse and chariot for chariot, and let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.” And he listened to their voice and did so.

**<sup>26</sup>** In the spring Ben-hadad mustered the Arameans and went up to Aphek to fight against Israel. **<sup>27</sup>** And the sons of Israel were mustered and provisioned and went against them. The sons of Israel encamped before them like two little flocks of goats, but the Arameans filled the land. **<sup>28</sup>** And a man of God came near and said to the king of Israel, “Thus says the LORD: Because the Arameans have said, ‘The LORD is a god of the hills but He is not a god of the valleys,’ therefore I will give all this great multitude into your hand, and you shall know that I am the LORD.”

**<sup>29</sup>** And they encamped opposite each other seven days. On the seventh day the battle was joined, and the sons of Israel struck down of the Arameans one hundred thousand foot soldiers in one day. **<sup>30</sup>** And the rest fled into the city of Aphek, and the wall fell upon twenty-seven thousand men who were left. And Ben-hadad fled and came into the city into an inner chamber.

**<sup>31</sup>** Then his servants said to him, “Behold now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings. Please let us put sackcloth on our waists and ropes on our heads and go out to the king of Israel. Perhaps he will spare your life.” **<sup>32</sup>** So they girded sackcloth around their waists and put ropes on their heads and came to the king of Israel and said, “Your servant Ben-hadad says, ‘Please let me live.’” And he said, “Is he still alive? He is my brother.” **<sup>33</sup>** Now the men were watching for a sign, and they quickly took it up from him and said, “Yes, your brother Ben-hadad.” Then he said, “Go, bring him.” Then Ben-hadad came out to him, and he had him come up into the chariot. **<sup>34</sup>** And Ben-hadad said to him, “The cities that my father took from your father I will restore, and you may make streets for yourself in Damascus, as my father made in Samaria.” And Ahab said, “I will let you go with this covenant.” So he made a covenant with him and let him go.

**<sup>35</sup>** And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said to his neighbor by the word of the LORD, “Strike me, please.” But the man refused to strike him. **<sup>36</sup>** Then he said to him, “Because you have not obeyed the voice of the LORD, behold, as soon as you have departed from me, a lion shall strike you down.” And as soon as he left him, a lion found him and struck him down. **<sup>37</sup>** Then he found another man and said, “Strike me, please.” And the man struck him and wounded him. **<sup>38</sup>** So the prophet departed and waited for the king by the road and disguised himself with a bandage over his eyes. **<sup>39</sup>** And as the king passed by, he cried out to the king and said, “Your servant went out into the midst of the battle, and behold, a man turned aside and brought a man to me and said, ‘Guard this man. If by any means he is missing, your life shall be for his life, or else you shall pay a talent of silver.’ **<sup>40</sup>** And as your servant was busy here and there, he was gone.” And the king of Israel said to him, “So shall your judgment be; you yourself have decided it.” **<sup>41</sup>** Then he hurried to remove the bandage from his eyes, and the king of Israel recognized him that he was of the prophets. **<sup>42</sup>** And he said to him, “Thus says the LORD: Because you have let go out of your hand the man whom I had devoted to destruction, therefore your life shall be for his life, and your people for his people.” **<sup>43</sup>** And the king of Israel went to his house sullen and angry, and came to Samaria. 

## Chapter 21

**<sup>1</sup>** Now Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard in Jezreel, beside the palace of Ahab king of Samaria. **<sup>2</sup>** And Ahab spoke to Naboth, saying, “Give me your vineyard, so that I may have it for a vegetable garden, because it is near my house. And I will give you a better vineyard in its place. Or, if it is good in your eyes, I will give you its value in money.” **<sup>3</sup>** But Naboth said to Ahab, “Far be it from me before the LORD that I should give you the inheritance of my fathers.”

**<sup>4</sup>** And Ahab went into his house sullen and angry because of the word that Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him, for he had said, “I will not give you the inheritance of my fathers.” And he lay down on his bed and turned away his face and would not eat food.

**<sup>5</sup>** But Jezebel, his wife, came to him and said, “Why is your spirit so sullen that you are not eating food?” **<sup>6</sup>** And he said to her, “Because I spoke to Naboth the Jezreelite and said to him, ‘Give me your vineyard for money, or else, if it pleases you, I will give you another vineyard in its place.’ And he answered, ‘I will not give you my vineyard.’” **<sup>7</sup>** And Jezebel his wife said to him, “Do you now govern the kingdom of Israel? Arise and eat food, and let your heart be glad. I will give you the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.”

**<sup>8</sup>** So she wrote letters in Ahab’s name and sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters to the elders and the nobles who lived in Naboth’s city and were dwelling with him. **<sup>9</sup>** And she wrote in the letters, saying, “Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth at the head of the people. **<sup>10</sup>** And set two worthless men opposite him, and let them testify against him, saying, ‘You cursed God and the king.’ Then carry him out and stone him to death.”

**<sup>11</sup>** And the men of his city, the elders and the nobles who lived in his city, did as Jezebel had sent word to them, as it was written in the letters that she had sent to them. **<sup>12</sup>** They proclaimed a fast and set Naboth at the head of the people. **<sup>13</sup>** Then the two worthless men came in and sat opposite him, and the worthless men testified against him, against Naboth in the presence of the people, saying, “Naboth cursed God and the king.” So they carried him out of the city and stoned him to death with stones. **<sup>14</sup>** Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, “Naboth has been stoned; he is dead.”

**<sup>15</sup>** And as soon as Jezebel heard that Naboth had been stoned and was dead, Jezebel said to Ahab, “Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give you for money, for Naboth is not alive but dead.” **<sup>16</sup>** And as soon as Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, Ahab rose to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite to take possession of it.

**<sup>17</sup>** Then the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, **<sup>18</sup>** “Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who is in Samaria. He is in the vineyard of Naboth, where he has gone to take possession of it. **<sup>19</sup>** And you shall speak to him, saying, ‘Thus says the LORD: Have you killed and also taken possession?’ And you shall speak to him, saying, ‘Thus says the LORD: In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, dogs shall lick your blood—even yours.’”

**<sup>20</sup>** And Ahab said to Elijah, “Have you found me, O my enemy?” And he answered, “I have found you, because you have sold yourself to do what is evil in the sight of the LORD. **<sup>21</sup>** You will see how I will bring disaster upon you. I will utterly sweep you away and will cut off from Ahab every male, both bond and free, in Israel. **<sup>22</sup>** And I will make your house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the provocation with which you have provoked Me to anger, and have made Israel to sin.” **<sup>23</sup>** And of Jezebel the LORD also spoke, saying, “The dogs shall eat Jezebel within the ramparts of Jezreel.” **<sup>24</sup>** “Anyone belonging to Ahab who dies in the city the dogs shall eat, and anyone who dies in the open country the birds of the heavens shall eat.”

**<sup>25</sup>** (There was none who sold himself to do what was evil in the sight of the LORD like Ahab, whom Jezebel his wife incited. **<sup>26</sup>** He acted very abominably in going after idols, according to all that the Amorites had done, whom the LORD had cast out before the sons of Israel.)

**<sup>27</sup>** And when Ahab heard those words, he tore his clothes and put sackcloth on his flesh and fasted and lay in sackcloth and walked about dejectedly.

**<sup>28</sup>** And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, **<sup>29</sup>** “Have you seen how Ahab has humbled himself before Me? Because he has humbled himself before Me, I will not bring the disaster in his days; but in his son’s days I will bring the disaster upon his house.” 

## Chapter 22

**<sup>1</sup>** For three years there was no war between Aram and Israel. **<sup>2</sup>** But in the third year, Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel. **<sup>3</sup>** And the king of Israel said to his servants, “Do you know that Ramoth-gilead belongs to us? Yet we are sitting still and do not take it out of the hand of the king of Aram.” **<sup>4</sup>** And he said to Jehoshaphat, “Will you go with me to battle at Ramoth-gilead?” And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, “I am as you are, my people as your people, my horses as your horses.”

**<sup>5</sup>** And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, “Please inquire first for the word of the LORD.” **<sup>6</sup>** Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said to them, “Shall I go to battle against Ramoth-gilead, or shall I refrain?” And they said, “Go up, for the Lord will give it into the hand of the king.” **<sup>7</sup>** But Jehoshaphat said, “Is there not still a prophet of the LORD here whom we may inquire?” **<sup>8</sup>** And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “There is still one man by whom we may inquire of the LORD, Micaiah the son of Imlah, but I hate him, for he does not prophesy good concerning me, but evil.” And Jehoshaphat said, “Let not the king say so.” **<sup>9</sup>** Then the king of Israel called an officer and said, “Bring quickly Micaiah the son of Imlah.”

**<sup>10</sup>** Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah were sitting each on his throne, clothed in robes, at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets were prophesying before them. **<sup>11</sup>** And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made for himself horns of iron and said, “Thus says the LORD, ‘With these you shall push the Arameans until they are consumed.’” **<sup>12</sup>** And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, “Go up to Ramoth-gilead and succeed, for the LORD will give it into the hand of the king.”

**<sup>13</sup>** And the messenger who went to summon Micaiah spoke to him, saying, “See now, the words of the prophets with one accord are favorable to the king. Let your word be like the word of one of them, and speak favorably.” **<sup>14</sup>** But Micaiah said, “As the LORD lives, what the LORD says to me, that I will speak.”

**<sup>15</sup>** And when he had come to the king, the king said to him, “Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall we refrain?” And he answered him, “Go up and succeed, and the LORD will give it into the hand of the king.” **<sup>16</sup>** But the king said to him, “How many times must I make you swear that you will tell me nothing but the truth in the name of the LORD?” **<sup>17</sup>** And he said, “I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains, like sheep that have no shepherd. And the LORD said, ‘These have no master; let each return to his house in peace.’” **<sup>18</sup>** Then the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Did I not say to you that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but evil?”

**<sup>19</sup>** And Micaiah said, “Therefore hear the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting on His throne, and all the host of heaven standing by Him on His right hand and on His left. **<sup>20</sup>** And the LORD said, ‘Who will entice Ahab so that he will go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead?’ And one said one thing, and another said another. **<sup>21</sup>** Then a spirit came forward and stood before the LORD and said, ‘I will entice him.’ **<sup>22</sup>** And the LORD said to him, ‘By what means?’ And he said, ‘I will go out and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.’ And He said, ‘You shall entice him, and you shall also succeed. Go out and do so.’ **<sup>23</sup>** Now therefore, behold, the LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouths of all these your prophets, and the LORD has declared disaster concerning you.”

**<sup>24</sup>** Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near and struck Micaiah on the cheek and said, “How did the Spirit of the LORD pass from me to speak to you?” **<sup>25</sup>** And Micaiah said, “You shall see on that day when you go into an inner room to hide yourself.” **<sup>26</sup>** And the king of Israel said, “Take Micaiah and return him to Amon the governor of the city and to Joash the king’s son, **<sup>27</sup>** and say, ‘Thus says the king: Put this man in prison and feed him meager rations of bread and water until I come in peace.’” **<sup>28</sup>** And Micaiah said, “If you return in peace, the LORD has not spoken by me.” And he said, “Hear, all you people!”

**<sup>29</sup>** So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead. **<sup>30</sup>** And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself and go into battle, but you wear your robes.” And the king of Israel disguised himself and went into battle. **<sup>31</sup>** Now the king of Aram had commanded the thirty-two captains of his chariots, saying, “Do not fight with small or great, but only with the king of Israel.” **<sup>32</sup>** And when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, they said, “Surely this is the king of Israel.” So they turned aside to fight against him, but Jehoshaphat cried out. **<sup>33</sup>** And when the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back from pursuing him.

**<sup>34</sup>** But a certain man drew his bow at random and struck the king of Israel between the joints of the armor. So he said to the driver of his chariot, “Turn around and carry me out of the battle, for I am wounded.” **<sup>35</sup>** And the battle raged that day, and the king was propped up in his chariot facing the Arameans, and he died at evening. And the blood from the wound flowed into the bottom of the chariot. **<sup>36</sup>** And about sunset a cry passed through the camp, saying, “Every man to his city, and every man to his land!”

**<sup>37</sup>** So the king died and was brought to Samaria, and they buried the king in Samaria. **<sup>38</sup>** And they washed the chariot at the pool of Samaria, and the dogs licked up his blood (now the prostitutes washed themselves there), according to the word of the LORD that He had spoken. **<sup>39</sup>** Now the rest of the acts of Ahab and all that he did, and the ivory house that he built and all the cities that he built, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? **<sup>40</sup>** So Ahab slept with his fathers, and Ahaziah his son reigned in his place.

**<sup>41</sup>** Now Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel. **<sup>42</sup>** Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. **<sup>43</sup>** And he walked in all the way of Asa his father. He did not turn aside from it, doing what was right in the eyes of the LORD. Yet the high places were not taken away, and the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places. **<sup>44</sup>** And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.

**<sup>45</sup>** Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he showed, and how he fought, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? **<sup>46</sup>** And the remnant of the male cult prostitutes who remained in the days of his father Asa, he expelled from the land. **<sup>47</sup>** There was no king in Edom; a deputy was king.

**<sup>48</sup>** Jehoshaphat made ships of Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold, but they did not go, for the ships were wrecked at Ezion-geber. **<sup>49</sup>** Then Ahaziah the son of Ahab said to Jehoshaphat, “Let my servants go with your servants in the ships.” But Jehoshaphat was not willing.

**<sup>50</sup>** And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father. And Jehoram his son reigned in his place.

**<sup>51</sup>** Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and he reigned two years over Israel. **<sup>52</sup>** He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD and walked in the way of his father and in the way of his mother and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. **<sup>53</sup>** He served Baal and worshiped him and provoked the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger in every way that his father had done. 