# The Book of Daniel

## Chapter 1

**<sup>1</sup>** In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and laid siege to it. **<sup>2</sup>** The LORD gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, along with some of the vessels of the house of God, and he brought them to the land of Shinar, to the house of his god. He brought the vessels into the treasury of his god.

**<sup>3</sup>** Then the king commanded Ashpenaz, the chief of his eunuchs, to bring some of the sons of Israel, both of the royal family and of the nobility, **<sup>4</sup>** youths without blemish, of good appearance and skillful in all wisdom, knowledgeable and understanding science, and capable of serving in the king’s palace, and to teach them the literature and language of the Chaldeans. **<sup>5</sup>** The king appointed for them a daily portion of the king’s delicacies and of the wine which he drank. They were to be trained for three years, and at the end of that time they were to stand before the king. **<sup>6</sup>** Among them were Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, from the sons of Judah. **<sup>7</sup>** The chief of the eunuchs gave them names: to Daniel he gave the name Belteshazzar, to Hananiah Shadrach, to Mishael Meshach, and to Azariah Abednego.

**<sup>8</sup>** But Daniel resolved in his heart that he would not defile himself with the king’s delicacies or with the wine which he drank. So he requested of the chief of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself. **<sup>9</sup>** Now God gave Daniel favor and compassion in the sight of the chief of the eunuchs, **<sup>10</sup>** but the chief of the eunuchs said to Daniel, “I fear my lord the king, who assigned your food and your drink. Why should he see your faces looking more haggard than the other youths your age? Then you would endanger my head with the king.”

**<sup>11</sup>** Then Daniel said to the steward whom the chief of the eunuchs had appointed over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, **<sup>12</sup>** “Please test your servants for ten days. Let us be given vegetables to eat and water to drink. **<sup>13</sup>** Then let our appearance and the appearance of the youths who eat the king’s delicacies be observed by you, and treat your servants according to what you see.” **<sup>14</sup>** So he listened to them in this matter and tested them for ten days. **<sup>15</sup>** At the end of ten days, their appearance was better and fatter in flesh than all the youths who ate the king’s delicacies. **<sup>16</sup>** So the steward took away their delicacies and the wine they were to drink and gave them vegetables.

**<sup>17</sup>** As for these four youths, God gave them knowledge and skill in all literature and wisdom, and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.

**<sup>18</sup>** At the end of the days when the king had commanded that they should be brought in, the chief of the eunuchs brought them before Nebuchadnezzar. **<sup>19</sup>** The king spoke with them, and among them all, none was found like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. So they stood before the king. **<sup>20</sup>** In every matter of wisdom and understanding about which the king inquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and enchanters that were in all his kingdom. **<sup>21</sup>** Daniel remained there until the first year of King Cyrus. 

## Chapter 2

**<sup>1</sup>** In the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar had dreams. His spirit was troubled, and his sleep left him. **<sup>2</sup>** The king commanded that the magicians, the enchanters, the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans be summoned to tell the king his dreams. So they came and stood before the king. **<sup>3</sup>** The king said to them, “I have had a dream, and my spirit is troubled to know the dream.” **<sup>4</sup>** Then the Chaldeans spoke to the king in Aramaic: “O king, live forever! Tell the dream to your servants, and we will show the interpretation.” **<sup>5</sup>** The king answered the Chaldeans, “The command from me is firm: if you do not make known to me the dream and its interpretation, you shall be torn limb from limb, and your houses shall be made a heap of ruins. **<sup>6</sup>** But if you declare the dream and its interpretation, you shall receive gifts and rewards and great honor from me. Therefore declare to me the dream and its interpretation.” **<sup>7</sup>** They answered a second time and said, “Let the king tell his servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation.” **<sup>8</sup>** The king answered and said, “I know with certainty that you are trying to gain time, because you see that my command is firm. **<sup>9</sup>** If you do not make the dream known to me, there is but one decree for you. For you have conspired to speak lying and deceitful words to me until I change my mind. Instead, you must tell me the dream, and I shall know that you can show me its interpretation.”

**<sup>10</sup>** The Chaldeans answered the king and said, “There is not a man on earth who can declare the king’s matter, for no great and powerful king has asked such a thing of any magician, enchanter, or Chaldean. **<sup>11</sup>** The thing that the king asks is difficult, and no one can declare it to the king except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.” **<sup>12</sup>** Because of this the king was angry and very furious, and he commanded that all the wise men of Babylon be killed. **<sup>13</sup>** So the decree went forth that the wise men should be killed, so they also sought Daniel and his companions to kill them.

**<sup>14</sup>** Then Daniel replied with counsel and discretion to Arioch, the captain of the king’s guard, who had gone out to kill the wise men of Babylon. **<sup>15</sup>** He answered and said to Arioch the king’s officer, “Why is the decree of the king so urgent?” Then Arioch made the matter known to Daniel. **<sup>16</sup>** So Daniel went in and requested of the king that he would give him time, so that he could declare the interpretation to the king.

**<sup>17</sup>** Then Daniel went to his house and made the matter known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions, **<sup>18</sup>** and he urged them to seek mercy from the God of heaven concerning this mystery, so that Daniel and his companions might not be destroyed with the rest of the wise men of Babylon. **<sup>19</sup>** Then the mystery was revealed to Daniel in a vision of the night. Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven. **<sup>20</sup>** Daniel answered and said:

“Blessed be the name of God forever and ever,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for wisdom and might belong to Him.**<sup>21</sup>** He changes the times and the seasons;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He removes kings and sets up kings;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He gives wisdom to the wise<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and knowledge to those who understand.<br/>
**<sup>22</sup>** He reveals the deep and hidden things;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He knows what is in the darkness,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and light dwells with Him.<br/>
**<sup>23</sup>** To You, O God of my fathers, I give thanks and praise,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for You have given me wisdom and might,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and have now made known to me what we asked of You,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for You have made known to us the matter of the king.”

**<sup>24</sup>** Therefore Daniel went in to Arioch, whom the king had appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon. He went and said to him, “Do not destroy the wise men of Babylon. Bring me in before the king, and I will declare the interpretation to the king.” **<sup>25</sup>** Then Arioch brought Daniel in before the king quickly and said thus to him: “I have found among the exiles from Judah a man who will make known to the king the interpretation.” **<sup>26</sup>** The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, “Are you able to make known to me the dream that I have seen and its interpretation?” **<sup>27</sup>** Daniel answered the king and said, “The mystery that the king has asked, no wise men, enchanters, magicians, or diviners are able to declare to the king. **<sup>28</sup>** But there is a God in heaven who reveals mysteries, and He has made known to King Nebuchadnezzar what will be in the distant future. Your dream and the visions of your head as you lay in bed are these:

**<sup>29</sup>** To you, O king, as you lay in bed came thoughts of what would be after this, and He who reveals mysteries made known to you what shall be. **<sup>30</sup>** But as for me, this mystery has not been revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any other living man, but in order that the interpretation may be made known to the king, and that you may know the thoughts of your heart.

**<sup>31</sup>** You, O king, were looking, and saw a great image. This image, mighty and of exceeding brightness, stood before you, and its appearance was terrifying. **<sup>32</sup>** The head of this image was of fine gold, its chest and arms of silver, its middle and thighs of bronze, **<sup>33</sup>** its legs of iron, its feet partly of iron and partly of clay. **<sup>34</sup>** As you looked, a stone was cut out—not by hands—and it struck the image on its feet of iron and clay and broke them in pieces. **<sup>35</sup>** Then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the silver, and the gold were all broken in pieces and became like chaff of the summer threshing floors, and the wind carried them away so that no trace of them could be found. But the stone that struck the image became a great mountain and filled the whole earth.

**<sup>36</sup>** This was the dream. Now we will tell the king its interpretation.

**<sup>37</sup>** You, O king, the king of kings, to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the power, and the strength, and the glory— **<sup>38</sup>** and wherever the sons of man dwell, the beasts of the field and the birds of the heavens He has given into your hand and made you ruler over them all—you are the head of gold. **<sup>39</sup>** After you shall arise another kingdom inferior to you, and another, a third kingdom of bronze, which shall rule over all the earth. **<sup>40</sup>** Then there shall be a fourth kingdom, strong as iron, for iron crushes and shatters everything. Like iron that breaks all these, it shall crush and break in pieces. **<sup>41</sup>** As you saw the feet and toes, partly of potter’s clay and partly of iron, it shall be a divided kingdom, but some of the strength of the iron shall be in it, just as you saw the iron mixed with clay. **<sup>42</sup>** And as the toes of the feet were partly iron and partly clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong and partly brittle. **<sup>43</sup>** As you saw the iron mixed with clay, so they will mix with one another in marriage, but they will not hold together, just as iron does not mix with clay.

**<sup>44</sup>** In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that shall never be destroyed, nor shall the kingdom be left to another people. It shall crush all these kingdoms and bring them to an end, and it shall stand forever. **<sup>45</sup>** Just as you saw that a stone was cut out from the mountain without hands, and that it broke in pieces the iron, the bronze, the clay, the silver, and the gold, so the great God has made known to the king what shall be after this. The dream is certain, and its interpretation sure.”

**<sup>46</sup>** Then King Nebuchadnezzar fell on his face and paid homage to Daniel and commanded that an offering and incense be presented to him. **<sup>47</sup>** The king answered and said to Daniel, “Truly your God is God of gods and Lord of kings, and a revealer of mysteries, for you have been able to reveal this mystery.” **<sup>48</sup>** Then the king gave Daniel high honors and many great gifts and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon and chief prefect over all the wise men of Babylon. **<sup>49</sup>** Daniel made a request of the king, and he appointed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego over the administration of the province of Babylon. But Daniel remained at the king’s court. 

## Chapter 3

**<sup>1</sup>** Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, its height sixty cubits and its width six cubits. He set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon. **<sup>2</sup>** Then Nebuchadnezzar the king called the satraps, the prefects, and the governors, the counselors, the treasurers, the judges, the magistrates, and all the officials of the provinces to come for a gathering at the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had built. **<sup>3</sup>** Then the satraps, the prefects, and the governors, the counselors, the treasurers, the judges, the magistrates, and all the officials of the provinces gathered for the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had built, and they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had built.

**<sup>4</sup>** Then the herald cried aloud, “To you it is commanded, O peoples, nations, and tongues, **<sup>5</sup>** that at the time you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of music, you shall fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king has set up. **<sup>6</sup>** And whoever does not fall down and worship shall immediately be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.” **<sup>7</sup>** Therefore at that time, when all the peoples heard the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of music, all the peoples, nations, and tongues fell down and worshiped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

**<sup>8</sup>** At that time certain Chaldeans came forward and accused the Jews. **<sup>9</sup>** They spoke and said to Nebuchadnezzar the king, “O king, live forever! **<sup>10</sup>** You, O king, have made a decree that every man who hears the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of music shall fall down and worship the golden image, **<sup>11</sup>** and whoever does not fall down and worship shall be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. **<sup>12</sup>** There are certain Jews whom you have appointed over the affairs of the province of Babylon—Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego—these men, O king, do not pay attention to you. They do not serve your gods or worship the golden image which you have set up.”

**<sup>13</sup>** Then Nebuchadnezzar in furious rage commanded that Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego be brought. So they brought these men before the king. **<sup>14</sup>** Nebuchadnezzar said to them, “Is it true, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that you do not serve my gods or worship the golden image which I have set up? **<sup>15</sup>** Now if you are ready, at the time you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of music, to fall down and worship the image which I have made, then it will be well with you. But if you do not worship, you shall immediately be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. And who is the god that will deliver you out of my hands?”

**<sup>16</sup>** Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered and said to the king, “O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer you in this matter. **<sup>17</sup>** If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and He will deliver us out of your hand, O king. **<sup>18</sup>** But if not, let it be known to you, O king, that we will not serve your gods or worship the golden image which you have built.”

**<sup>19</sup>** Then Nebuchadnezzar was filled with fury, and the expression of his face changed toward Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. He ordered the furnace to be heated seven times more than it was usually heated. **<sup>20</sup>** He commanded the mighty men of his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace. **<sup>21</sup>** Then these men were bound in their cloaks, their tunics, their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace. **<sup>22</sup>** Because the king’s command was urgent and the furnace was exceedingly hot, the flame of the fire killed those men who took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. **<sup>23</sup>** And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell bound into the middle of the burning fiery furnace.

**<sup>24</sup>** Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonished and rose up in haste. He said to his counselors, “Did we not cast three men bound into the fire?” They answered and said to the king, “That is True, O king.” **<sup>25</sup>** He answered and said, “Look! I see four men unbound, walking in the middle of the fire, and they are unharmed, and the appearance of the fourth is like a son of the gods.”

**<sup>26</sup>** Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the door of the burning fiery furnace. He declared, “Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, servants of the Most High God, come out and come here!” Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came out from the middle of the fire. **<sup>27</sup>** And the satraps, the prefects, the governors, and the king’s counselors gathered together and saw that the fire had no power over the bodies of these men. The hair of their heads was not singed, their cloaks were not harmed, and no smell of fire had come upon them.

**<sup>28</sup>** Nebuchadnezzar declared, “Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who sent His angel and delivered His servants who trusted in Him and set aside the king’s command and yielded their bodies rather than serve or worship any god except their own God. **<sup>29</sup>** Therefore I make a decree that any man of any people, nation, or tongue who speaks anything against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego shall be torn limb from limb and his house laid in ruins, for there is no other god who is able to deliver in this way.” **<sup>30</sup>** Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the province of Babylon. 

## Chapter 4

**<sup>1</sup>** Nebuchadnezzar the king, to all the peoples, nations, and languages that dwell in all the earth: Peace be multiplied to you. **<sup>2</sup>** It has seemed good to me to declare the signs and wonders that the Most High God has worked for me. **<sup>3</sup>** How great are His signs, and how mighty are His wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and His dominion endures from generation to generation.

**<sup>4</sup>** I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at ease in my house and flourishing in my palace. **<sup>5</sup>** I saw a dream that made me afraid. The thoughts on my bed and the visions of my head disturbed me. **<sup>6</sup>** So I issued a decree to bring in before me all the wise men of Babylon, so that they might make known to me the interpretation of the dream. **<sup>7</sup>** So the magicians, enchanters, Chaldeans, and diviners came in, and I told the dream to them, but they could not interpret it for me. **<sup>8</sup>** But at last Daniel came in before me—he who is named Belteshazzar after the name of my god, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods—and I told the dream to him:

**<sup>9</sup>** “O Belteshazzar, chief of the magicians, I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in you, and no mystery is too difficult for you. Tell me the visions of my dream that I saw, and its interpretation. **<sup>10</sup>** These were the visions of my head as I lay on my bed: I looked and saw a tree in the midst of the earth, and its height was great. **<sup>11</sup>** The tree grew and became strong. Its height reached to heaven, and it was visible to the end of all the earth. **<sup>12</sup>** Its foliage was beautiful, its fruit abundant, and in it was food for all. The beasts of the field found shade under it, the birds of the heavens lived in its branches, and all flesh was fed from it.

**<sup>13</sup>** I saw in the visions of my head as I lay on my bed, and there was a watcher, a holy one who came down from heaven. **<sup>14</sup>** He called out with a loud voice and said, ‘Chop down the tree and cut off its branches, strip off its foliage and scatter its fruit. Let the beasts flee from under it, and the birds from its branches. **<sup>15</sup>** But leave the stump with its roots in the ground, bound with a band of iron and bronze, in the tender grass of the field. Let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth. **<sup>16</sup>** Let his mind be changed from a man’s, and let a beast’s mind be given to him, and let seven times pass over him. **<sup>17</sup>** The sentence is by the decree of the watchers, and the decision by the word of the holy ones, so that the living may know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of man, and gives it to whom He will, and sets over it the lowliest of men.’

**<sup>18</sup>** I, King Nebuchadnezzar, have seen this dream. And you, Belteshazzar, declare its interpretation, since all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make the interpretation known to me, but you are able, for the spirit of the holy gods is in you.”

**<sup>19</sup>** Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was dismayed for a while, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spoke and said, “Belteshazzar, do not let the dream or the interpretation trouble you.” Belteshazzar answered and said, “My lord, may the dream be for those who hate you, and its interpretation for your enemies. **<sup>20</sup>** The tree that you saw, which grew and became strong, whose height reached to heaven and was visible to all the earth, **<sup>21</sup>** whose foliage was beautiful and its fruit abundant, and in which was food for all, under which the beasts of the field lived and in whose branches the birds of the heavens dwelt— **<sup>22</sup>** it is you, O king, who have grown and become strong. Your greatness has grown and reaches to heaven, and your dominion to the ends of the earth.

**<sup>23</sup>** And as the king saw a watcher, a holy one, coming down from heaven and saying, ‘Chop down the tree and destroy it, but leave the stump with its roots in the ground, bound with a band of iron and bronze, in the tender grass of the field, and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the field until seven times pass over him’— **<sup>24</sup>** this is the interpretation, O king, and it is a decree of the Most High, which has come upon my lord the king: **<sup>25</sup>** You shall be driven from among men, and your dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field. You shall be made to eat grass like cattle, and you shall be wet with the dew of heaven. Seven times shall pass over you, until you know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of man and gives it to whom He will. **<sup>26</sup>** And as it was commanded to leave the stump of the roots of the tree, your kingdom shall be assured to you after you come to know that Heaven rules. **<sup>27</sup>** Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to you: break off your sins by practicing righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the oppressed—perhaps there may be a lengthening of your prosperity.”

**<sup>28</sup>** All this came upon King Nebuchadnezzar. **<sup>29</sup>** At the end of twelve months, as he was walking on the roof of the royal palace of Babylon, **<sup>30</sup>** the king said, “Isn't this the great city of Babylon, which I have built by the might of my power as a royal residence and for the glory of my majesty?” **<sup>31</sup>** While the word was still in the king’s mouth, a voice came from heaven: “O King Nebuchadnezzar, to you it is declared: The kingdom has departed from you. **<sup>32</sup>** You shall be driven from among men, and your dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field. You shall be made to eat grass like cattle, and seven times shall pass over you, until you know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of man and gives it to whom He will.” **<sup>33</sup>** Immediately the word was fulfilled concerning Nebuchadnezzar. He was driven from among men, ate grass like cattle, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven until his hair grew like eagle’s feathers and his nails like bird’s claws.

**<sup>34</sup>** But at the end of the appointed days, I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted up my eyes to heaven, and my reason returned to me. I blessed the Most High and praised and honored Him who lives forever, for His dominion is an everlasting dominion, and His kingdom endures from generation to generation. **<sup>35</sup>** All the inhabitants of the earth are accounted as nothing, and He does according to His will among the hosts of heaven and the inhabitants of the earth. None can restrain His hand or say to Him, “What have You done?”

**<sup>36</sup>** At the same time, my reason returned to me, and the glory of my kingdom, my majesty, and my splendor returned to me. My counselors and my lords sought me out, and I was reestablished in my kingdom, and surpassing greatness was added to me. **<sup>37</sup>** Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and exalt and honor the King of heaven, for all His works are right and His ways are just. And those who walk in pride He is able to humble. 

## Chapter 5

**<sup>1</sup>** Belshazzar the king made a great feast for a thousand of his lords and drank wine in front of the thousand. **<sup>2</sup>** While under the influence of the wine, Belshazzar gave orders to bring in the gold and silver vessels that Nebuchadnezzar his father had taken from the temple that was in Jerusalem, so that the king and his lords, his wives and his concubines, might drink from them. **<sup>3</sup>** Then they brought in the gold vessels that had been taken out of the temple, the house of God that was in Jerusalem, and the king and his lords, his wives and his concubines, drank from them. **<sup>4</sup>** They drank the wine and praised the gods of gold and silver, bronze, iron, wood, and stone.

**<sup>5</sup>** Suddenly the fingers of a man’s hand appeared and wrote opposite the lampstand on the plaster of the wall of the king’s palace, and the king saw the hand as it wrote. **<sup>6</sup>** Then the king’s face changed, and his thoughts alarmed him; the joints of his hips gave way, and his knees knocked together. **<sup>7</sup>** The king cried aloud to bring in the enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the astrologers. The king declared to the wise men of Babylon, “Whoever reads this writing and shows me its interpretation shall be clothed in purple, have a chain of gold around his neck, and be the third ruler in the kingdom.” **<sup>8</sup>** Then all the king’s wise men came in, but they could not read the writing or make known its interpretation to the king. **<sup>9</sup>** Then King Belshazzar was greatly alarmed, and his face grew even paler, and his lords were perplexed.

**<sup>10</sup>** The queen, because of the words of the king and his lords, came into the banquet hall. The queen declared, “O king, live forever! Let not your thoughts alarm you or your face be changed. **<sup>11</sup>** There is a man in your kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy gods. In the days of your father, light and understanding and wisdom like the wisdom of the gods were found in him, and King Nebuchadnezzar your father—your father the king—made him chief of the magicians, enchanters, Chaldeans, and astrologers. **<sup>12</sup>** Because an excellent spirit, knowledge, and understanding to interpret dreams, explain riddles, and solve problems were found in this Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar, let Daniel now be called, and he will show the interpretation.”

**<sup>13</sup>** Then Daniel was brought in before the king. The king said to Daniel, “Are you that Daniel who is one of the exiles of Judah, whom the king my father brought from Judah? **<sup>14</sup>** I have heard of you, that the spirit of the gods is in you, and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom are found in you. **<sup>15</sup>** Now the wise men, the enchanters, have been brought in before me to read this writing and make known to me its interpretation, but they could not show the interpretation of the matter. **<sup>16</sup>** But I have heard that you can give interpretations and solve problems. Now if you can read the writing and make known to me its interpretation, you shall be clothed in purple, have a chain of gold around your neck, and be the third ruler in the kingdom.”

**<sup>17</sup>** Then Daniel answered and said before the king, “Keep your gifts to yourself, and give your rewards to another. Nevertheless, I will read the writing to the king and make known to him the interpretation. **<sup>18</sup>** O king, the Most High God gave Nebuchadnezzar your father kingship, greatness, glory, and majesty. **<sup>19</sup>** And because of the greatness that He gave him, all peoples, nations, and languages trembled and feared before him. Whom he wished he killed, and whom he wished he kept alive; whom he wished he raised up, and whom he wished he humbled. **<sup>20</sup>** But when his heart was lifted up and his spirit was hardened so that he dealt proudly, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and his glory was taken from him. **<sup>21</sup>** He was driven from among the sons of man, and his mind was made like that of a beast, and his dwelling was with the wild donkeys. He was fed grass like an ox, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, until he knew that the Most High God rules the kingdom of man and sets over it whom He will. **<sup>22</sup>** Yet you, his son, Belshazzar, have not humbled your heart, though you knew all this, **<sup>23</sup>** but you have lifted yourself up against the Lord of heaven. The vessels of His house have been brought in before you, and you and your lords, your wives, and your concubines have drunk wine from them. And you have praised the gods of silver and gold, bronze, iron, wood, and stone, which do not see or hear or know, but the God in whose hand is your breath and all your ways, you have not honored.

**<sup>24</sup>** Then from His presence the hand was sent, and this writing was inscribed. **<sup>25</sup>** And this is the writing that was inscribed: MENE, MENE, TEKEL, and PARSIN. **<sup>26</sup>** This is the interpretation of the matter: MENE—God has numbered your kingdom and brought it to an end; **<sup>27</sup>** TEKEL—you have been weighed in the balances and found wanting; **<sup>28</sup>** PERES—your kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and Persians.”

**<sup>29</sup>** Then Belshazzar gave the command, and they clothed Daniel in purple, put a chain of gold around his neck, and made a proclamation concerning him that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom. **<sup>30</sup>** That very night Belshazzar the Chaldean king was killed. **<sup>31</sup>** And Darius the Mede received the kingdom, being about sixty-two years old. 

## Chapter 6

**<sup>1</sup>** It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom one hundred twenty satraps, to be throughout the whole kingdom, **<sup>2</sup>** and over them three high officials, of whom Daniel was one, so that these satraps might give account to them, and the king might not suffer loss. **<sup>3</sup>** Then this Daniel distinguished himself above the high officials and satraps, because an excellent spirit was in him. The king planned to set him over the whole kingdom.

**<sup>4</sup>** Then the high officials and the satraps sought to find a ground for complaint against Daniel with regard to the kingdom, but they could find no ground for complaint or any fault, because he was faithful, and no error or fault was found in him. **<sup>5</sup>** Then these men said, “We shall not find any ground for complaint against this Daniel unless we find it in connection with the law of his God.”

**<sup>6</sup>** Then these high officials and satraps conspired together and came to the king and said thus to him: “O King Darius, live forever! **<sup>7</sup>** All the high officials of the kingdom, the prefects and the satraps, the counselors and the governors are agreed that the king should establish an ordinance and enforce an interdict, that whoever makes petition to any god or man for thirty days, except to you, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions. **<sup>8</sup>** Now, O king, establish the law and sign the document, so that it cannot be changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be revoked.” **<sup>9</sup>** Therefore King Darius signed the document and law.

**<sup>10</sup>** When Daniel found out that the document had been signed, he went to his house. In his upper chamber, with its windows open toward Jerusalem, he knelt upon his knees three times a day and prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he had done previously. **<sup>11</sup>** Then these men came by agreement and found Daniel praying and pleading before his God. **<sup>12</sup>** Then they approached and spoke before the king concerning the interdict: “Did you not sign an interdict, that anyone who prays to any god or man within thirty days except to you, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions?” The king answered and said, “The matter stands fast, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be revoked.” **<sup>13</sup>** Then they answered and said before the king, “Daniel, who is one of the exiles from Judah, pays no attention to you, O king, or the law you have signed, but makes his prayers three times a day.”

**<sup>14</sup>** Then the king, when he heard these words, was much distressed and set his heart on delivering Daniel. He labored until the sun went down to rescue him. **<sup>15</sup>** Then these men came by agreement to the king and said to the king, “Know, O king, that it is a law of the Medes and Persians that no law or statute that the king establishes can be changed.” **<sup>16</sup>** Then the king commanded, and Daniel was brought and cast into the den of lions. The king spoke and said to Daniel, “May your God, whom you serve continually, deliver you.” **<sup>17</sup>** And a stone was brought and laid over the entrance of the den, and the king sealed it with his own signet and with the signet of his lords, so that nothing might be changed concerning Daniel. **<sup>18</sup>** Then the king went to his palace and spent the night fasting. No entertainment was brought before him, and sleep fled from him.

**<sup>19</sup>** Then, at break of day, the king arose and hastened to the den of lions. **<sup>20</sup>** As he came near to the den where Daniel was, he cried out in a tone of anguish. The king said to Daniel, “O Daniel, servant of the living God, has your God, whom you serve continually, been able to deliver you from the lions?” **<sup>21</sup>** Then Daniel said to the king, “O king, live forever! **<sup>22</sup>** My God sent his angel and shut the lions’ mouths, and they have not harmed me, because I was found blameless before him; and also before you, O king, I have done no harm.” **<sup>23</sup>** Then the king was exceedingly glad and commanded that Daniel be taken up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no harm was found on him, because he had trusted in his God.

**<sup>24</sup>** Then the king commanded, and those men who had maliciously accused Daniel were brought and cast into the den of lions—they, their children, and their wives. And before they reached the bottom of the den, the lions overpowered them and broke all their bones in pieces.

**<sup>25</sup>** Then King Darius wrote to all the peoples, nations, and languages that dwell in all the earth: “Peace be multiplied to you. **<sup>26</sup>** I make a decree, that in all my royal dominion men are to tremble and fear before the God of Daniel, for he is the living God, enduring forever; his kingdom shall never be destroyed, and his dominion shall be to the end. **<sup>27</sup>** He delivers and rescues; he works signs and wonders in heaven and on earth, he who has saved Daniel from the power of the lions.”

**<sup>28</sup>** So this Daniel prospered during the reign of Darius and the reign of Cyrus the Persian. 

## Chapter 7

**<sup>1</sup>** In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon, Daniel saw a dream and visions of his head while on his bed. Then he wrote down the dream and recounted the matter. **<sup>2</sup>** Daniel said, “I looked in my vision by night, and saw the four winds of heaven stirring up the great sea. **<sup>3</sup>** And four great beasts came up out of the sea, different from one another.

**<sup>4</sup>** The first was like a lion and had the wings of an eagle. I looked until its wings were plucked off, and it was lifted up from the earth and made to stand on two feet like a man, and a man’s heart was given to it.

**<sup>5</sup>** And I saw another beast, a second, like a bear. It was raised up on one side, and it had three ribs in its mouth between its teeth. And they said thus to it, ‘Arise, devour much flesh.’

**<sup>6</sup>** After this I looked, and I saw another, like a leopard, which had four wings of a bird on its back. And the beast had four heads, and dominion was given to it.

**<sup>7</sup>** After this I looked in the night visions, and saw a fourth beast, terrifying and dreadful and exceedingly strong. It had great iron teeth; it devoured and broke in pieces and trampled what was left with its feet. It was different from all the beasts that were before it, and it had ten horns. **<sup>8</sup>** As I was considering the horns, I saw there came up among them another horn, a little one, before which three of the first horns were uprooted. And I saw in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man and a mouth speaking great things.

**<sup>9</sup>** I watched until thrones were set in place, and the Ancient of Days took His seat. His clothing was white as snow, and the hair of His head like pure wool; His throne was flames of fire, and its wheels a burning fire. **<sup>10</sup>** A river of fire flowed and came out from before Him. A thousand thousands served Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before Him. The court sat in judgment, and the books were opened.

**<sup>11</sup>** I watched then because of the sound of the great words which the horn was speaking. I watched until the beast was slain and its body destroyed and given to be burned with fire. **<sup>12</sup>** As for the rest of the beasts, their dominion was taken away, but their lives were prolonged for a season and a time.

**<sup>13</sup>** I looked in the night visions, and saw that with the clouds of heaven there came one like a son of man. He came to the Ancient of Days and was brought near before Him. **<sup>14</sup>** And to him was given dominion and glory and a kingdom, that all peoples, nations, and tongues should serve him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion that shall not pass away, and his kingdom one that shall not be destroyed.

**<sup>15</sup>** As for me, Daniel, my spirit was distressed within me, and the visions of my head troubled me. **<sup>16</sup>** I approached one of those who stood nearby and asked him the truth concerning all this. So he spoke to me and revealed to me the interpretation of the things: **<sup>17</sup>** ‘These four great beasts are four kings who shall arise out of the earth. **<sup>18</sup>** But the saints of the Most High shall receive the kingdom and possess the kingdom forever, forever and ever.’

**<sup>19</sup>** Then I desired to know the truth concerning the fourth beast, which was different from all the others, exceedingly terrifying, with its teeth of iron and claws of bronze, which devoured, broke in pieces, and trampled what was left with its feet, **<sup>20</sup>** and concerning the ten horns that were on its head, and the other one that came up, before which three fell—the horn that had eyes and a mouth that spoke great things, and seemed greater than its companions. **<sup>21</sup>** I looked, and this horn made war with the saints and prevailed over them **<sup>22</sup>** until the Ancient of Days came, and judgment was given for the saints of the Most High, and the time came when the saints possessed the kingdom.

**<sup>23</sup>** This is what he said: ‘The fourth beast shall be a fourth kingdom on earth, which shall be different from all the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall trample it down and break it in pieces. **<sup>24</sup>** As for the ten horns, out of this kingdom ten kings shall arise, and another shall arise after them. He shall be different from the former ones and shall subdue three kings. **<sup>25</sup>** He shall speak words against the Most High and shall cause trouble for the saints of the Most High, and shall think to change times and law, and they shall be given into his hand for a time, and times, and half a time. **<sup>26</sup>** But the court shall sit in judgment, and his dominion shall be taken away, to be consumed and destroyed completely. **<sup>27</sup>** And the kingdom and the dominion and the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High. Their kingdom shall be an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey them.’

**<sup>28</sup>** Here is the end of the matter. As for me, Daniel, my thoughts greatly troubled me, and my countenance changed, but I kept the matter in my heart. 

## Chapter 8

**<sup>1</sup>** In the third year of the reign of King Belshazzar, a vision appeared to me, Daniel, after the one that had appeared to me previously. **<sup>2</sup>** I saw in the vision—and as I looked, I was in the citadel of Susa, which is in the province of Elam—and in the vision I saw myself beside the Ulai canal. **<sup>3</sup>** Then I lifted my eyes and looked, and there before me was a ram standing beside the canal. It had two horns, and the two horns were high, but one was higher than the other, and the higher one came up last. **<sup>4</sup>** I saw the ram charging westward and northward and southward. No beast could stand before it, and there was no one who could rescue from its power. It did as it pleased and became great. **<sup>5</sup>** As I was considering this, suddenly a male goat came from the west, crossing the surface of the whole earth without touching the ground. And the goat had a conspicuous horn between its eyes. **<sup>6</sup>** It came up to the ram that had the two horns, which I had seen standing beside the canal, and ran at it in the fury of its strength. **<sup>7</sup>** I saw it reach the ram, and it was enraged against it. It struck the ram and broke its two horns. The ram had no strength to stand before it. So it threw it down to the ground and trampled it, and there was no one to rescue the ram from its power. **<sup>8</sup>** Then the male goat grew exceedingly great. But when it became strong, the great horn was broken, and in its place four conspicuous horns came up toward the four winds of heaven. **<sup>9</sup>** Out of one of them came a little horn, which grew exceedingly great toward the south, toward the east, and toward the glorious land. **<sup>10</sup>** It grew as high as the host of heaven. It cast down to the earth some of the host and some of the stars and trampled them. **<sup>11</sup>** It even exalted itself as high as the prince of the host, and from him the regular burnt offering was taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was overthrown. **<sup>12</sup>** Because of transgression, an army was given over to the horn along with the regular burnt offering, and it cast truth to the ground and acted and succeeded.

**<sup>13</sup>** Then I heard a holy one speaking, and another holy one said to the one who spoke, “For how long is the vision concerning the regular burnt offering, the transgression that desolates, the giving over of the sanctuary and the host to be trampled?” **<sup>14</sup>** And he said to me, “For two thousand three hundred evenings and mornings. Then the sanctuary shall be cleansed.”

**<sup>15</sup>** When I, Daniel, had seen the vision, I sought to understand it. Then suddenly one who had the appearance of a man stood before me. **<sup>16</sup>** And I heard a human voice between the banks of the Ulai, and it called out and said, “Gabriel, make this man understand the vision.” **<sup>17</sup>** So he came near to where I stood, and when he came, I was terrified and fell on my face. But he said to me, “Understand, son of man, that the vision pertains to the time of the end.” **<sup>18</sup>** As he was speaking with me, I fell into a deep sleep with my face to the ground. But he touched me and made me stand upright. **<sup>19</sup>** He said, “Watch and I will make known to you what shall happen in the latter time of the indignation, for it pertains to the appointed time of the end.

**<sup>20</sup>** As for the ram that you saw with the two horns, these are the kings of Media and Persia. **<sup>21</sup>** And the male goat is the king of Greece. The great horn between its eyes is the first king. **<sup>22</sup>** As for the horn that was broken, in whose place four others arose, four kingdoms shall arise from his nation, but not with his power. **<sup>23</sup>** In the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors have reached their full measure, a king of fierce countenance and skilled in intrigue shall arise. **<sup>24</sup>** His power shall be mighty—but not by his own power—and he shall destroy marvelously. He shall succeed and do as he pleases. He shall destroy the mighty and the holy people. **<sup>25</sup>** By his cunning he shall cause deceit to prosper under his hand. In his own mind he shall become great. Without warning he shall destroy many. He shall even rise up against the Prince of princes, but he shall be broken—yet not by human hand. **<sup>26</sup>** The vision of the evenings and mornings that has been told is true, but seal up the vision, for it refers to many days from now.” **<sup>27</sup>** Then I, Daniel, was exhausted and sick for days. Afterward I rose and went about the king’s business. But I was appalled by the vision, and there was no one to explain it. 

## Chapter 9

**<sup>1</sup>** In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans— **<sup>2</sup>** in the first year of his reign, I, Daniel, understood from the books the number of the years which came as the word of the LORD to Jeremiah the prophet, that the desolations of Jerusalem would last seventy years. **<sup>3</sup>** So I turned my face to the Lord God, seeking Him by prayer and supplications, with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes. **<sup>4</sup>** I prayed to the LORD my God and confessed, saying, “O Lord, the great and awesome God, who keeps covenant and steadfast love with those who love Him and keep His commandments, **<sup>5</sup>** we have sinned and committed iniquity, we have acted wickedly and rebelled, turning aside from Your commandments and Your ordinances. **<sup>6</sup>** We have not listened to Your servants, the prophets, who spoke in Your name to our kings, our princes, our fathers, and to all the people of the land. **<sup>7</sup>** To You, O Lord, belongs righteousness, but to us open shame—as on this day—to the men of Judah, to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all Israel, those who are near and those who are far away in all the lands to which You have driven them, because of their unfaithfulness which they committed against You. **<sup>8</sup>** O LORD, to us belongs open shame—to our kings, our princes, and our fathers—because we have sinned against You. **<sup>9</sup>** To the Lord our God belong compassion and forgiveness, for we have rebelled against Him. **<sup>10</sup>** We have not obeyed the voice of the LORD our God, to walk in His laws, which He set before us by His servants the prophets. **<sup>11</sup>** Indeed, all Israel has transgressed Your law and turned aside, refusing to obey Your voice. So the curse and the oath written in the law of Moses, the servant of God, have been poured out upon us, because we have sinned against Him. **<sup>12</sup>** He has confirmed His words, which He spoke against us and against our rulers who ruled us, by bringing upon us a great calamity. For under the whole heaven there has not been done anything like what was done to Jerusalem. **<sup>13</sup>** As it is written in the law of Moses, all this calamity has come upon us; yet we have not sought the favor of the LORD our God by turning from our iniquities and gaining insight by Your truth. **<sup>14</sup>** Therefore the LORD has kept ready the calamity and has brought it upon us, for the LORD our God is righteous in all His deeds which He has done, but we have not obeyed His voice. **<sup>15</sup>** And now, O Lord our God, who brought Your people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand and made a name for Yourself, as it is this day—we have sinned, we have acted wickedly. **<sup>16</sup>** O Lord, in keeping with all Your righteous acts, let Your anger and Your wrath turn away from Your city Jerusalem, Your holy mountain. Because of our sins and the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and Your people have become a reproach to all who are around us. **<sup>17</sup>** So now, our God, listen to the prayer of Your servant and to his supplications, and for Your own sake, O Lord, cause Your face to shine upon Your desolate sanctuary. **<sup>18</sup>** Incline Your ear, my God, and hear. Open Your eyes and see our desolations, and the city that is called by Your name. For we do not present our supplications before You because of our righteousness, but because of Your great mercy. **<sup>19</sup>** O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, pay attention and act. Do not delay—for Your own sake, my God—because Your city and Your people are called by Your name.”

**<sup>20</sup>** While I was still speaking and praying and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the LORD my God for the holy mountain of my God— **<sup>21</sup>** while I was still speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, came to me in swift flight at the time of the evening offering. **<sup>22</sup>** He instructed me and spoke with me and said, “O Daniel, I have now come forth to give you insight and understanding. **<sup>23</sup>** At the beginning of your supplications a word went out, and I have come to tell it to you, for you are greatly beloved. So consider the word and understand the vision. **<sup>24</sup>** Seventy weeks are decreed concerning your people and your holy city, to finish transgression, to put an end to sin, to make atonement for iniquity, to bring in everlasting righteousness, to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the Most Holy one. **<sup>25</sup>** Know, therefore, and understand: from the going forth of the decree to restore and rebuild Jerusalem, until the coming of Messiah, the prince, there shall be seven weeks, and for sixty-two weeks it shall be built again, with plaza and moat, but in troubled times. **<sup>26</sup>** And after the sixty-two weeks, Messiah shall be cut off and shall have nothing. And the people of the prince who is to come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary. Its end shall come with a flood, and to the end there shall be war—desolations are decreed.

**<sup>27</sup>** And he shall make a firm covenant with many for one week. But in the middle of the week he shall cause sacrifice and offerings to cease. And on the wing of abominations shall come one who makes desolate, until the decreed end is poured out upon the desolator.” 

## Chapter 10

**<sup>1</sup>** In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia, a message was revealed to Daniel, who was called Belteshazzar. The message was true, and it concerned a great conflict. He understood the message and had understanding of the vision. **<sup>2</sup>** In those days I, Daniel, was mourning for three full weeks. **<sup>3</sup>** I ate no rich food, no meat or wine entered my mouth, and I did not anoint myself at all until the three weeks were completed.

**<sup>4</sup>** On the twenty-fourth day of the first month, as I was standing on the bank of the great river, that is, the Tigris, **<sup>5</sup>** I lifted up my eyes and looked, and I saw a man clothed in linen, with a belt of fine gold from Uphaz around his waist. **<sup>6</sup>** His body was like beryl, his face had the appearance of lightning, his eyes were like flaming torches, his arms and legs like the gleam of polished bronze, and the sound of his words like the sound of a multitude.

**<sup>7</sup>** I, Daniel, alone saw the vision, for the men who were with me did not see the vision. Yet a great trembling fell upon them, and they fled to hide themselves. **<sup>8</sup>** So I was left alone and saw this great vision, and no strength was left in me. My face grew deathly pale, and I had no strength. **<sup>9</sup>** Then I heard the sound of his words, and as I heard the sound of his words, I fell on my face in a deep sleep, with my face to the ground. **<sup>10</sup>** Then, it happened that a hand touched me and set me trembling on my hands and knees. **<sup>11</sup>** And he said to me, “O Daniel, man greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak to you, and stand upright, for now I have been sent to you.” And when he had spoken this word to me, I stood up trembling. **<sup>12</sup>** Then he said to me, “Do not be afraid, Daniel, for from the first day that you set your heart to understand and to humble yourself before your God, your words were heard, and I have come in response to your words.

**<sup>13</sup>** But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me for twenty-one days. Then behold, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me, for I was left there with the kings of Persia. **<sup>14</sup>** Now I have come to make you understand what shall happen to your people in the latter days, for the vision pertains to days yet to come.” **<sup>15</sup>** When he had spoken to me according to these words, I turned my face to the ground and was speechless. **<sup>16</sup>** And behold, one in the likeness of the sons of man touched my lips. Then I opened my mouth and spoke. I said to him who stood before me, “My lord, by reason of the vision, sorrows have overwhelmed me, and I have retained no strength. **<sup>17</sup>** How can my lord’s servant talk with my lord? For now no strength remains in me, and no breath is left in me.”

**<sup>18</sup>** Then again the one having the appearance of a man touched me and strengthened me. **<sup>19</sup>** And he said, “Do not be afraid, O man greatly beloved. Peace be to you; be strong and of good courage.” And as he spoke to me, I was strengthened and said, “Let my lord speak, for you have strengthened me.” **<sup>20</sup>** Then he said, “Do you know why I have come to you? But now I must return to fight against the prince of Persia, and when I go out, you will see the prince of Greece come. **<sup>21</sup>** But I will tell you what is written in the Book of Truth. There is none who contends with me against these except Michael your prince.” 

## Chapter 11

**<sup>1</sup>** And as for me, in the first year of Darius the Mede, I stood up to confirm and strengthen him. **<sup>2</sup>** And now I will show you the truth: Three more kings shall arise in Persia, and the fourth shall be far richer than all of them. And when he has become strong through his riches, he shall stir up all against the kingdom of Greece. **<sup>3</sup>** Then a mighty king shall arise, who shall rule with great dominion and do as he pleases. **<sup>4</sup>** But as soon as he has arisen, his kingdom shall be broken and divided toward the four winds of heaven, but not to his descendants, nor with the authority with which he ruled. For his kingdom shall be uprooted and given to others besides them. **<sup>5</sup>** Then the king of the south shall grow strong, but one of his commanders shall grow stronger than he and rule; his dominion shall be a great dominion indeed. **<sup>6</sup>** After some years they shall make an alliance, and the daughter of the king of the south shall come to the king of the north to make an agreement. But she shall not retain the power of her arm, and neither he nor his arm shall stand. But she shall be given up, along with those who brought her in, and he who fathered her, and he who supported her in those times. **<sup>7</sup>** But from a branch of her roots one shall arise in his place, and he shall come against the army and enter the fortress of the king of the north; he shall act against them and prevail. **<sup>8</sup>** He shall also carry off to Egypt their gods with their molten images and their precious vessels of silver and gold, and for some years he shall refrain from attacking the king of the north. **<sup>9</sup>** Then the latter shall come into the realm of the king of the south, but shall return to his own land. **<sup>10</sup>** His sons shall wage war and assemble a multitude of great forces, and one of them shall come and overflow and pass through. Then he shall return and wage war up to his fortress. **<sup>11</sup>** Then the king of the south shall be enraged and go out and fight with the king of the north. And the latter shall raise a great multitude, but it shall be given into the hand of the former. **<sup>12</sup>** When the multitude is taken away, his heart shall be exalted, and he shall cast down tens of thousands, but he shall not prevail. **<sup>13</sup>** For the king of the north shall again raise a multitude, greater than the former, and after some years he shall come on with a great army and abundant supplies. **<sup>14</sup>** In those times many shall rise against the king of the south, and the violent ones among your own people shall lift themselves up in order to fulfill the vision, but they shall stumble. **<sup>15</sup>** Then the king of the north shall come and cast up siegeworks and take a well-fortified city. And the forces of the south shall not stand, nor even his choicest troops, for there shall be no strength to stand. **<sup>16</sup>** But he who comes against him shall do as he pleases, and no one shall stand before him. And he shall stand in the glorious land, with destruction in his hand. **<sup>17</sup>** He shall set his face to come with the strength of his whole kingdom, and he shall bring terms of peace and give him the daughter of women to destroy the kingdom. But it shall not succeed or be to his advantage. **<sup>18</sup>** Afterward he shall turn his face to the coastlands and shall capture many. But a commander shall put an end to his insolence; indeed, he shall turn his insolence back upon him. **<sup>19</sup>** Then he shall turn his face back toward the fortresses of his own land, but he shall stumble and fall and shall not be found. **<sup>20</sup>** Then one shall arise in his place who shall send an exactor of tribute through the glory of the kingdom. But within a few days he shall be broken, though not in anger or in battle. **<sup>21</sup>** In his place shall arise a contemptible man, to whom royal majesty has not been given. He shall come in without warning and obtain the kingdom by intrigue. **<sup>22</sup>** Armies shall be utterly swept away before him and broken, even the prince of the covenant. **<sup>23</sup>** And from the time that an alliance is made with him, he shall act deceitfully, and he shall rise and become strong with a small people. **<sup>24</sup>** Without warning he shall come into the richest parts of the province, and he shall do what neither his fathers nor his fathers’ fathers have done, scattering among them plunder, spoil, and goods. He shall devise plans against strongholds, but only for a time. **<sup>25</sup>** He shall stir up his strength and his heart against the king of the south with a great army, and the king of the south shall wage war with a very great and mighty army. But he shall not stand, for plots shall be devised against him. **<sup>26</sup>** Those who eat his rich food shall destroy him, and his army shall be swept away, and many shall fall slain. **<sup>27</sup>** And as for the two kings, their hearts shall be bent on evil. They shall speak lies at the same table, but it shall not succeed, for the end is still to be at the appointed time. **<sup>28</sup>** Then he shall return to his land with great wealth, but his heart shall be set against the holy covenant. He shall act and return to his own land. **<sup>29</sup>** At the appointed time he shall return and come into the south, but it shall not be as it was before. **<sup>30</sup>** For ships from Kittim shall come against him, and he shall be disheartened and return, and he shall rage against the holy covenant and act. He shall return and show regard for those who forsake the holy covenant. **<sup>31</sup>** Forces from him shall arise and profane the temple and the fortress. They shall take away the regular burnt offering, and they shall set up the abomination that makes desolate. **<sup>32</sup>** He shall corrupt with flattery those who act wickedly against the covenant, but the people who know their God shall be strong and take action. **<sup>33</sup>** The wise among the people shall give understanding to many, though they shall fall by sword and flame, by captivity and plunder, for many days. **<sup>34</sup>** When they stumble, they shall receive a little help, and many shall join them in hypocrisy. **<sup>35</sup>** Some of the wise shall stumble, so that they may be refined, purified, and made white, until the time of the end, for it still awaits the appointed time. **<sup>36</sup>** And the king shall do as he pleases. He shall exalt himself and magnify himself above every god and shall speak astonishing things against the God of gods. He shall prosper until the indignation is accomplished, for what is decreed shall be done. **<sup>37</sup>** He shall pay no regard to the gods of his fathers or to the one beloved by women. He shall not pay regard to any god, for he shall magnify himself above all. **<sup>38</sup>** But in their place he shall honor the god of fortresses—a god whom his fathers did not know he shall honor with gold and silver, with precious stones and costly gifts. **<sup>39</sup>** He shall deal with the strongest fortresses with the help of a foreign god. He shall greatly honor those who acknowledge him, and shall make them rulers over many and shall divide the land for a price. **<sup>40</sup>** At the time of the end the king of the south shall clash with him, but the king of the north shall storm against him with chariots and horsemen and many ships. He shall enter countries and overflow and pass through. **<sup>41</sup>** He shall enter the glorious land, and tens of thousands shall fall. But these shall escape from his hand: Edom and Moab and the chief of the sons of Ammon. **<sup>42</sup>** He shall stretch out his hand against the countries, and the land of Egypt shall not escape. **<sup>43</sup>** He shall gain control over the treasures of gold and silver and all the precious things of Egypt, and the Libyans and Cushites shall follow at his heels. **<sup>44</sup>** But news from the east and the north shall alarm him, and he shall go out with great fury to destroy and to devote many to destruction. **<sup>45</sup>** And he shall pitch his palatial tents between the sea and the glorious holy mountain. Yet he shall come to his end, with no one to help him. 

## Chapter 12

**<sup>1</sup>** At that time Michael shall arise, the great prince who stands over the sons of your people, and there shall be a time of trouble such as has never occurred since there was a nation until that time. But at that time your people shall be delivered, everyone who is found written in the book. **<sup>2</sup>** And many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. **<sup>3</sup>** And those who are wise shall shine like the brightness of the firmament, and those who turn many to righteousness, like the stars forever and ever. **<sup>4</sup>** But you, Daniel, shut up the words and seal the book until the time of the end. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall increase.

**<sup>5</sup>** Then I, Daniel, looked, and saw: two others stood, one on this bank of the river and one on that bank of the river. **<sup>6</sup>** And one said to the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, “How long shall it be until the end of these wonders?” **<sup>7</sup>** And I heard the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river. He raised his right hand and his left hand toward heaven and swore by Him who lives forever that it would be for a time, times, and half a time, and that when the shattering of the power of the holy people comes to an end, all these things will be finished. **<sup>8</sup>** I heard, but I did not understand. So I said, “My lord, what shall be the outcome of these things?”

**<sup>9</sup>** And he said, “Go your way, Daniel, for the words are shut up and sealed until the time of the end. **<sup>10</sup>** Many shall be purified and made white and refined, but the wicked shall act wickedly. And none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand. **<sup>11</sup>** And from the time that the regular burnt offering is taken away and the abomination that makes desolate is set up, there shall be one thousand two hundred ninety days. **<sup>12</sup>** Blessed is he who waits and reaches the one thousand three hundred thirty-five days. **<sup>13</sup>** But as for you, go your way to the end. Then you shall rest and shall stand in your allotted place at the end of days.” 