# The Gospel According to John

## Chapter 1

**<sup>1</sup>** In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. **<sup>2</sup>** This Word was in the beginning with God. **<sup>3</sup>** All things came into being through him, and apart from him not one thing was created, which has been created. **<sup>4</sup>** In him was life, and that life is the light of man. **<sup>5</sup>** And the light shone in the darkness, and the darkness did not overcome it.

**<sup>6</sup>** There came a man sent from God, whose name was John. **<sup>7</sup>** This man came as a witness, to testify about the light, so that all might believe through him. **<sup>8</sup>** He was not the light, but he came to testify about the light, **<sup>9</sup>** that the true light, which enlightens everyone, was coming into the world.

**<sup>10</sup>** He was in the world, and the world came into being through him, yet the world did not know him. **<sup>11</sup>** He came to his own people, but even his own people did not receive him. **<sup>12</sup>** But to all who did receive him, and who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God, **<sup>13</sup>** who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of a man, but of God. **<sup>14</sup>** And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we saw his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth.

**<sup>15</sup>** John testified about him and cried out, saying, “This was he of whom I said, ‘The one coming after me is greater than me, because he existed before me.’” **<sup>16</sup>** For from his fullness we have all received, grace upon grace. **<sup>17</sup>** For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. **<sup>18</sup>** No one has ever seen God; however, the only-born God, who is at the Father’s side, he has made him known.

**<sup>19</sup>** And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, “Who are you?” **<sup>20</sup>** He confessed and did not deny, but admitted, “I am not the Christ.” **<sup>21</sup>** So they asked him, “What then? Are you Elijah?” And he said, “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” And he answered, “No.” **<sup>22</sup>** Then they said to him, “Who are you? We need to give an answer to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?” **<sup>23</sup>** He said, “I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness, ‘Make straight the way of the Lord,’ as Isaiah the prophet said.” **<sup>24</sup>** And those who had been sent from the Pharisees **<sup>25</sup>** asked him, “Then why are you baptizing, if you are neither the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet?” **<sup>26</sup>** John answered them, saying, “While I baptize with water, among you stands one whom you do not know: **<sup>27</sup>** the one coming after me, the strap of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.”

**<sup>28</sup>** These things took place in Bethany across the Jordan, where John was baptizing. **<sup>29</sup>** The next day he saw Jesus coming toward him and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world! **<sup>30</sup>** This is the one of whom I said, ‘After me comes a man who is greater than me, because he existed before me.’ **<sup>31</sup>** I myself did not know him, but I came baptizing with water, for the purpose of revealing him to Israel.”

**<sup>32</sup>** And John testified, saying, “I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it remained on him. **<sup>33</sup>** I myself did not know him, but the one who sent me to baptize with water said to me, ‘The one on whom you see the Spirit descend and remain, this is the one who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’ **<sup>34</sup>** And I have seen and have testified that this is the Son of God.”

**<sup>35</sup>** The next day John was standing with two of his disciples, **<sup>36</sup>** and seeing Jesus walking by, he said, “Behold, the Lamb of God!” **<sup>37</sup>** The two disciples heard him say this, and they followed Jesus.

**<sup>38</sup>** Jesus turned and saw them following him and said to them, “What are you seeking?” They said to him, “Rabbi” (which means Teacher), “where are you staying?” **<sup>39</sup>** He said to them, “Come and you will see.” So they went and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day, for it was about the tenth hour. **<sup>40</sup>** One of the two who heard John and followed him was Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother. **<sup>41</sup>** He first sought out his own brother Simon and said to him, “We have found the Messiah” (which means Christ). **<sup>42</sup>** He brought him to Jesus. Looking at him, Jesus said, “You are Simon, the son of John; you will be called Cephas” (which is translated Peter).

**<sup>43</sup>** The next day Jesus decided to go to Galilee. He found Philip and said to him, “Follow me.” **<sup>44</sup>** Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. **<sup>45</sup>** Philip found Nathanael and said to him, “We have found the one of whom Moses wrote about, in the Law and the prophets: Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.” **<sup>46</sup>** Nathanael said to him, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?” Philip said to him, “Come and see.” **<sup>47</sup>** Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him and said of him, “Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no deceit!” **<sup>48</sup>** Nathanael said to him, “How do you know me?” Jesus answered and said to him, “Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.” **<sup>49</sup>** Nathanael answered him, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God! You are the King of Israel!” **<sup>50</sup>** Jesus answered and said to him, “Do you believe because I said to you, ‘I saw you under the fig tree?’ You will see greater things than these.” **<sup>51</sup>** And he said to him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you will see heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.” 

## Chapter 2

**<sup>1</sup>** On the third day, a wedding took place in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there. **<sup>2</sup>** Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the wedding. **<sup>3</sup>** When the wine ran out, Jesus’ mother said to him, “They have no wine.” **<sup>4</sup>** Jesus said to her, “What does this have to do with me, woman? My hour has not yet come.” **<sup>5</sup>** His mother said to the servants, “Do whatever he tells you.”

**<sup>6</sup>** Now there were six stone water jars standing there, according to the Jewish purification customs, each holding twenty or thirty gallons. **<sup>7</sup>** Jesus said to them, “Fill the jars with water.” So they filled them up to the brim. **<sup>8</sup>** Then he said to them, “Now draw some out and take it to the master of the feast.” And they did as Jesus requested. **<sup>9</sup>** When the master of the feast tasted the water that had become wine, not knowing where it came from—though the servants who had drawn the water knew—the master of the feast called the bridegroom **<sup>10</sup>** and said to him, “Everyone serves the good wine first, and then the cheaper wine after the guests have drunk freely. But you have kept the good wine until now.” **<sup>11</sup>** This, the first of his signs, Jesus performed in Cana of Galilee, and he revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.

**<sup>12</sup>** After this, he went down to Capernaum with his mother, his brothers, and his disciples, and they stayed there for a few days.

**<sup>13</sup>** The Passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. **<sup>14</sup>** In the temple, he found people selling oxen, sheep, and doves, and the money-changers sitting there. **<sup>15</sup>** Making a whip out of cords, he drove them all out of the temple, along with the sheep and the oxen, and he poured out the coins of the money-changers and overturned their tables. **<sup>16</sup>** To those selling doves, he said, “Take these things out of here! Stop turning my Father’s house into a marketplace!” **<sup>17</sup>** His disciples remembered that it is written, “Zeal for your house will consume me.”

**<sup>18</sup>** Then the Jews responded to him, saying, “What sign can you show us, since you’re doing these things?” **<sup>19</sup>** Jesus answered them, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” **<sup>20</sup>** The Jews said, “This temple took forty-six years to build, and you’ll raise it up in three days?” **<sup>21</sup>** But he was speaking about the temple of his body. **<sup>22</sup>** So when he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the Scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken.

**<sup>23</sup>** While he was in Jerusalem at the Passover during the festival, many believed in his name because they saw the miracles he was performing. **<sup>24</sup>** But Jesus himself did not entrust himself to them, because he knew all people, **<sup>25</sup>** and he had no need for anyone to testify about man, for he himself knew what was in a person. 

## Chapter 3

**<sup>1</sup>** Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. **<sup>2</sup>** This man came to Jesus by night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God, for no one can perform these signs that you do unless God is with him.” **<sup>3</sup>** Jesus answered and said to him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a man is born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” **<sup>4</sup>** Nicodemus said to him, “How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother’s womb and be born?” **<sup>5</sup>** Jesus answered, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a man is born of water and Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. **<sup>6</sup>** That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. **<sup>7</sup>** Do not be amazed that I said to you, ‘You must be born again.’ **<sup>8</sup>** The wind blows where it wishes, and you hear its sound, but you do not know where it comes from or where it is going; so it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit.”

**<sup>9</sup>** Nicodemus answered and said to him, “How can these things happen?” **<sup>10</sup>** Jesus answered and said to him, “You are a teacher in Israel, and you do not know these things? **<sup>11</sup>** Truly, truly, I say to you, we speak of what we know and testify to what we have seen, yet you do not accept our testimony. **<sup>12</sup>** If I told you earthly things and you do not believe, how would you believe if I tell you heavenly things? **<sup>13</sup>** No one has ascended into heaven except the one who descended from heaven—the Son of Man. **<sup>14</sup>** And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, **<sup>15</sup>** so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.

**<sup>16</sup>** For God loved the world so much, that He gave his one and only Son, so that everyone who believes in him might not perish but have eternal life. **<sup>17</sup>** For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but so that the world might be saved through him. **<sup>18</sup>** The one who believes in him is not condemned, but the one who does not believe has already been condemned, because he has not believed in the name of the one and only Son of God. **<sup>19</sup>** And this is the judgment: the light has come into the world, but people loved [to stay in] the darkness rather than the light because their deeds were evil. **<sup>20</sup>** For everyone who does evil hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his deeds be exposed. **<sup>21</sup>** But the one who practices the truth comes to the light, so that it may be evident that his deeds have been done in God.”

**<sup>22</sup>** After this, Jesus and his disciples went into the Judean countryside, and he stayed there with them and was baptizing. **<sup>23</sup>** John also was baptizing in Aenon near Salim, because water was plentiful there, and people were coming and being baptized— **<sup>24</sup>** for John had not yet been thrown into prison. **<sup>25</sup>** Then a dispute arose between some of John’s disciples and a Jew concerning purification. **<sup>26</sup>** And they came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, the one who was with you across the Jordan, about whom you testified—look, he is baptizing, and everyone is going to him.” **<sup>27</sup>** John answered and said, “A person cannot receive even one thing unless it is given to him from heaven. **<sup>28</sup>** You yourselves witness that I said, ‘I am not the Christ,’ but ‘I have been sent ahead of him.’ **<sup>29</sup>** The one who has the bride is the bridegroom; the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly at the bridegroom’s voice. Therefore, this joy of mine has been made complete. **<sup>30</sup>** He must increase, but I must decrease."

**<sup>31</sup>** The one who comes from above is above all; the one who is from the earth belongs to the earth and speaks from the earth. The one who comes from heaven is above all. **<sup>32</sup>** He testifies to what he has seen and heard, yet no one accepts his testimony. **<sup>33</sup>** The one who has accepted his testimony has certified that God is true. **<sup>34</sup>** For the one whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for he gives the Spirit without measure. **<sup>35</sup>** The Father loves the Son and has given all things into his hand. **<sup>36</sup>** The one who believes in the Son has eternal life, but the one who disobeys the Son will not see life; instead, the wrath of God remains on him. 

## Chapter 4

**<sup>1</sup>** Now when Jesus learned that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John— **<sup>2</sup>** although Jesus himself was not baptizing, but his disciples were— **<sup>3</sup>** he left Judea and departed again for Galilee. **<sup>4</sup>** But he had to pass through Samaria. **<sup>5</sup>** So he came to a town of Samaria called Sychar, near the plot of land that Jacob had given to his son Joseph. **<sup>6</sup>** Jacob’s well was there, so Jesus, tired from his journey, sat down by the well. It was about noon.

**<sup>7</sup>** A Samaritan woman came to draw water, and Jesus said to her, “Give me a drink.” **<sup>8</sup>** For his disciples had gone into the town to buy food. **<sup>9</sup>** The Samaritan woman said to him, “How is it that you, a Jew, ask for a drink from me, a Samaritan woman?” (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.) **<sup>10</sup>** Jesus answered her, “If you knew the gift of God and who it is that is saying to you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.” **<sup>11</sup>** The woman said to him, “Lord, you have no bucket, and the well is deep. Where do you get this living water from? **<sup>12</sup>** Are you greater than our ancestor Jacob, who gave us the well and drank from it himself, as did his sons and his livestock?” **<sup>13</sup>** Jesus said to her, “Everyone who drinks of this water will be thirsty again, **<sup>14</sup>** but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never be thirsty again. The water that I will give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life.” **<sup>15</sup>** The woman said to him, “Lord, give me this water, so that I won’t get thirsty and have to keep coming here to draw water.”

**<sup>16</sup>** He said to her, “Go, call your husband, and come back here.” **<sup>17</sup>** The woman answered, “I have no husband.” Jesus said to her, “You are right in saying, ‘I have no husband,’ **<sup>18</sup>** for you have had five husbands, and the one you have now is not your husband. What you have said is true.” **<sup>19</sup>** The woman said to him, “Sir, I see that you are a prophet. **<sup>20</sup>** Our ancestors worshiped on this mountain, but you say that the place where people must worship is in Jerusalem.” **<sup>21</sup>** Jesus said to her, “Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father. **<sup>22</sup>** You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, for salvation is from the Jews. **<sup>23</sup>** But the hour is coming, and is now here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father is seeking such people to worship him. **<sup>24</sup>** God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.” **<sup>25</sup>** The woman said to him, “I know that Messiah is coming (the one called Christ). When he comes, he will explain everything to us.” **<sup>26</sup>** Jesus said to her, “I AM he, the one speaking to you.”

**<sup>27</sup>** Just then his disciples returned and were amazed that he was talking with a woman, but no one said, “What do you want?” or “Why are you talking with her?” **<sup>28</sup>** So the woman left her water jar, went back to the town, and said to the people, **<sup>29</sup>** “Come, see a man who told me everything I ever did. Could this be the Christ?” **<sup>30</sup>** They left the town and were coming to him.

**<sup>31</sup>** Meanwhile, the disciples were urging him, saying, “Rabbi, eat something.” **<sup>32</sup>** But he said to them, “I have food to eat that you do not know about.” **<sup>33</sup>** So the disciples said to one another, “Has someone brought him something to eat?” **<sup>34</sup>** Jesus said to them, “My food is to do the will of the one who sent me and to complete his work. **<sup>35</sup>** Don’t you say, ‘There are still four months, and then comes the harvest’? Look, I tell you, lift up your eyes and see that the fields are already white for harvest. **<sup>36</sup>** The one who reaps is receiving wages and gathering fruit for eternal life, so that the sower and the reaper may rejoice together. **<sup>37</sup>** For in this the saying is true: ‘One sows and another reaps.’ **<sup>38</sup>** I sent you to reap what you did not labor for; others have labored, and you have entered into their labor.”

**<sup>39</sup>** Many Samaritans from that town believed in him because of the woman’s testimony: “He told me everything I ever did.” **<sup>40</sup>** So when the Samaritans came to him, they asked him to stay with them, and he stayed there two days. **<sup>41</sup>** And many more believed because of his word. **<sup>42</sup>** They said to the woman, “It is no longer because of what you said that we believe, for we have heard for ourselves and know that this is truly the Savior of the world.”

**<sup>43</sup>** After the two days, he departed from there and went to Galilee. **<sup>44</sup>** For Jesus himself had testified that a prophet has no honor in his own hometown. **<sup>45</sup>** When he arrived in Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him, having seen all that he had done in Jerusalem at the festival, for they too had been at the festival.

**<sup>46</sup>** So he came again to Cana in Galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. And there was a certain royal official whose son was sick in Capernaum. **<sup>47</sup>** When this man heard that Jesus had come from Judea to Galilee, he went to him and asked him to come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death. **<sup>48</sup>** Jesus said to him, “Unless you people see signs and wonders, you will not believe.” **<sup>49</sup>** The royal official said to him, “Lord, come down before my child dies.” **<sup>50</sup>** Jesus said to him, “Go, your son lives.” The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him and started on his way. **<sup>51</sup>** As he was going down, his servants met him and told him that his son was alive. **<sup>52</sup>** So he asked them the hour when he began to get better, and they said to him, “Yesterday at one in the afternoon the fever left him.” **<sup>53</sup>** The father realized that this was the hour when Jesus had said to him, “Your son lives.” And he himself believed, along with his whole household. **<sup>54</sup>** This was now the second sign that Jesus performed after coming from Judea to Galilee. 

## Chapter 5

**<sup>1</sup>** After this, there was a festival of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. **<sup>2</sup>** Now in Jerusalem, near the Sheep Gate, there is a pool called Bethesda in Hebrew, which has five covered walkways. **<sup>3</sup>** In these lay a large number of sick people—blind, lame, and paralyzed. **<sup>4</sup>** [waiting for the moving of the water, because an angel of the Lord would come down at certain times into the pool and stir the water; whoever stepped in first after the stirring of the water was healed of whatever disease they had. (Some early manuscripts do not include this verse.)] **<sup>5</sup>** A certain man was there who had been afflicted with his sickness for thirty-eight years. **<sup>6</sup>** When Jesus saw him lying there and knew that he had already been in that condition for a long time, he said to him, "Do you want to be made well?" **<sup>7</sup>** The sick man answered him, "Sir, I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, and while I’m trying to get there, someone else goes down ahead of me." **<sup>8</sup>** Jesus said to him, "Get up, take your mat, and walk." **<sup>9</sup>** Immediately the man became well, took up his mat, and started walking. Now, that day was a Sabbath.

**<sup>10</sup>** So the Jews said to the man who had been healed, "It’s the Sabbath, and it’s not lawful for you to carry your mat." **<sup>11</sup>** But he answered them, "The one who made me well told me, ‘Take your mat and walk.’" **<sup>12</sup>** They asked him, "Who is the man who told you, ‘Take it and walk’?" **<sup>13</sup>** But the one who was healed didn’t know who it was, because Jesus had slipped away into the crowd that was there.

**<sup>14</sup>** Later, Jesus found him in the temple and said to him, "Look, you’ve been made well. Stop sinning, or something worse might happen to you." **<sup>15</sup>** The man went away and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well. **<sup>16</sup>** Because of this, the Jews began persecuting Jesus, since he was doing these things on the Sabbath. **<sup>17</sup>** But Jesus answered them, "My Father is still working, and I’m working too." **<sup>18</sup>** For this reason, the Jews were even more determined to kill him, because not only was he breaking the Sabbath, but he was also calling God his own Father, making himself equal with God.

**<sup>19</sup>** So Jesus responded and said to them, "Truly, truly, I tell you, the Son can do nothing on his own, but only what he sees the Father doing. For whatever the Father does, the Son does likewise. **<sup>20</sup>** For the Father loves the Son and shows him everything he himself is doing. And he will show him even greater works than these, so that you’ll be amazed. **<sup>21</sup>** For just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to whomever he wishes. **<sup>22</sup>** Moreover, the Father doesn’t judge anyone, but he has entrusted all judgment to the Son, **<sup>23</sup>** so that everyone may honor the Son just as they honor the Father. Whoever doesn’t honor the Son doesn’t honor the Father who sent him. **<sup>24</sup>** Truly, truly, I tell you, whoever hears my word and believes the one who sent me has eternal life and doesn’t come into judgment, but has passed from death into life.

**<sup>25</sup>** Truly, truly, I tell you, an hour is coming—and is now here—when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live. **<sup>26</sup>** For just as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son to have life in himself too. **<sup>27</sup>** And he has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of Man. **<sup>28</sup>** Don’t be astonished at this, because an hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his voice **<sup>29</sup>** and come out—those who have done good to a resurrection of life, and those who have done evil to a resurrection of judgment.

**<sup>30</sup>** I can’t do anything on my own. As I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, because I don’t seek my own will but the will of the one who sent me. **<sup>31</sup>** If I testify about myself, my testimony isn’t valid. **<sup>32</sup>** There’s someone else who testifies about me, and I know that the testimony he gives about me is true. **<sup>33</sup>** You sent messengers to John, and he has testified to the truth. **<sup>34</sup>** Not that I accept human testimony, but I mention it so that you might be saved. **<sup>35</sup>** He was a burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light. **<sup>36</sup>** But I have a greater testimony than John’s: the works that the Father has given me to complete—the very works I’m doing—testify about me that the Father has sent me. **<sup>37</sup>** And the Father who sent me has himself testified about me. You’ve never heard his voice or seen his form, **<sup>38</sup>** nor does his word remain in you, because you don’t believe the one he sent. **<sup>39</sup>** You are searching the Scriptures because you are thinking to have eternal life through them, but these [scriptures] point to me; **<sup>40</sup>** and yet you’re unwilling to come to me so that you may have life.

**<sup>41</sup>** I don’t accept glory from people, **<sup>42</sup>** but I know you—that you don’t have the love of God in yourselves. **<sup>43</sup>** I’ve come in my Father’s name, and you don’t accept me; if someone else comes in his own name, you’ll accept him. **<sup>44</sup>** How can you believe, when you receive glory from one another and don’t seek the glory that comes from the only God? **<sup>45</sup>** Don’t think that I’ll accuse you before the Father. The one who accuses you is Moses, on whom you’ve set your hope. **<sup>46</sup>** For if you believed Moses, you would believe me, because he wrote about me. **<sup>47</sup>** But if you don’t believe his writings, how will you believe my words?" 

## Chapter 6

**<sup>1</sup>** After this, Jesus went to the other side of the Sea of Galilee, also called the Sea of Tiberias. **<sup>2</sup>** A large crowd followed him because they saw the miracles he was performing on those who were sick. **<sup>3</sup>** Jesus went up on a mountain and sat down there with his disciples. **<sup>4</sup>** Now the Passover, the festival of the Jews, was near. **<sup>5</sup>** When Jesus looked up and saw a large crowd coming toward him, he said to Philip, “Where are we going to buy bread so these people can eat?” **<sup>6</sup>** He said this to test him, for he himself knew what he was going to do. **<sup>7</sup>** Philip answered him, “Two hundred denarii worth of bread wouldn’t be enough for each of them to get even a little.” **<sup>8</sup>** One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, said to him, **<sup>9</sup>** “There’s a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what are they for so many people?” **<sup>10</sup>** Jesus said, “Have the people sit down.” There was plenty of grass in that place, so the men sat down, about five thousand in number. **<sup>11</sup>** Jesus then took the loaves, gave thanks, and distributed them to those who were seated, as much as they wanted, and he did the same with the fish. **<sup>12</sup>** When they were full, he told his disciples, “Gather up the leftover pieces so nothing is wasted.” **<sup>13</sup>** So they gathered them and filled twelve baskets with pieces from the five barley loaves left over by those who had eaten. **<sup>14</sup>** When the people saw the miracle he had done, they said, “This is truly the Prophet who is to come into the world.” **<sup>15</sup>** Realizing they were about to come and take him by force to make him king, Jesus withdrew again to the mountain by himself.

**<sup>16</sup>** When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea, **<sup>17</sup>** got into a boat, and started across the sea to Capernaum. It was now dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them. **<sup>18</sup>** The sea became rough because a strong wind was blowing. **<sup>19</sup>** After they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the boat, and they were afraid. **<sup>20</sup>** But he said to them, “It is I; don’t be afraid.” **<sup>21</sup>** Then they were willing to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat reached the land where they were heading.

**<sup>22</sup>** The next day, the crowd that had stayed on the other side of the sea saw that there had been only one boat there and that Jesus had not gotten into the boat with his disciples, but his disciples had gone away alone. **<sup>23</sup>** Other boats from Tiberias came near the place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks. **<sup>24</sup>** So when the crowd saw that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they got into the boats and went to Capernaum looking for Jesus.

**<sup>25</sup>** When they found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, “Rabbi, when did you get here?” **<sup>26</sup>** Jesus answered them, “Truly, truly, I tell you, you’re looking for me not because you saw miracles, but because you ate the loaves and were satisfied. **<sup>27</sup>** Don’t work for the food that perishes, but for the food that lasts into eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you, for God the Father has set his seal on him.” **<sup>28</sup>** Then they said to him, “What must we do to perform the works of God?” **<sup>29</sup>** Jesus answered them, “This is the work of God: that you believe in the one he has sent.” **<sup>30</sup>** So they said to him, “What sign are you going to do then, so we can see and believe you? What are you going to perform? **<sup>31</sup>** Our ancestors ate the manna in the wilderness, as it is written, ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’” **<sup>32</sup>** Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I tell you, it wasn’t Moses who gave you the bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven. **<sup>33</sup>** For the bread of God is the one who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.” **<sup>34</sup>** They said to him, “Lord, give us this bread always.”

**<sup>35</sup>** Jesus said to them, “I AM the bread of life. Whoever comes to me will never hunger, and whoever believes in me will never thirst. **<sup>36</sup>** But I told you that you’ve seen me and still don’t believe. **<sup>37</sup>** Everyone the Father gives me will come to me, and whoever comes to me I will never drive away. **<sup>38</sup>** For I have come down from heaven not to do my own will, but the will of the one who sent me. **<sup>39</sup>** And this is the will of the one who sent me: that I should lose none of all those he has given me, but raise them up on the last day. **<sup>40</sup>** For this is the will of my Father: that everyone who looks to the Son and believes in him should have eternal life, and I will raise them up on the last day.”

**<sup>41</sup>** Then the Jews began to grumble about him because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven.” **<sup>42</sup>** They were saying, “Isn’t this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How can he now say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?” **<sup>43</sup>** Jesus answered them, “Stop grumbling among yourselves. **<sup>44</sup>** No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws them, and I will raise them up on the last day. **<sup>45</sup>** It is written in the prophets, ‘And they will all be taught by God.’ Everyone who has heard and learned from the Father comes to me— **<sup>46</sup>** not that anyone has seen the Father except the one who is from God; he has seen the Father. **<sup>47</sup>** Truly, truly, I tell you, whoever believes has eternal life. **<sup>48</sup>** I AM the bread of life. **<sup>49</sup>** Your ancestors ate the manna in the wilderness and died. **<sup>50</sup>** This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that anyone may eat of it and not die. **<sup>51</sup>** I AM the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. And the bread that I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.”

**<sup>52</sup>** The Jews then argued fiercely among themselves, saying, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” **<sup>53</sup>** So Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you. **<sup>54</sup>** Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise them up on the last day. **<sup>55</sup>** For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink. **<sup>56</sup>** Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and I in them. **<sup>57</sup>** Just as the living Father sent me and I live because of the Father, so the one who feeds on me will live because of me. **<sup>58</sup>** This is the bread that came down from heaven—not like the bread the ancestors ate and died. Whoever eats this bread will live forever.” **<sup>59</sup>** He said these things while teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum.

**<sup>60</sup>** Many of his disciples, when they heard this, said, “This is a hard teaching; who can accept it?” **<sup>61</sup>** But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples were grumbling about this, said to them, “Does this offend you? **<sup>62</sup>** What if you see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before? **<sup>63</sup>** It is the Spirit who gives life; the flesh is no help at all. The words I have spoken to you are spirit and life. **<sup>64</sup>** But there are some of you who don’t believe.” For Jesus knew from the beginning who didn’t believe and who would betray him. **<sup>65</sup>** And he said, “This is why I told you that no one can come to me unless it is granted to them by the Father.”

**<sup>66</sup>** From that time on, many of his disciples turned back and no longer followed him. **<sup>67</sup>** So Jesus said to the Twelve, “You don’t want to leave too, do you?” **<sup>68</sup>** Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life. **<sup>69</sup>** We have come to believe and know that you are the Holy One of God.” **<sup>70</sup>** Jesus replied to them, “Didn’t I choose you, the Twelve? Yet one of you is a devil.” **<sup>71</sup>** He was speaking about Judas, son of Simon Iscariot, for he, one of the Twelve, was going to betray him. 

## Chapter 7

**<sup>1</sup>** After this, Jesus was traveling around in Galilee, for he did not want to travel in Judea because the Jewish leaders were seeking to kill him. **<sup>2</sup>** Now the Jewish Festival of Tabernacles was approaching. **<sup>3</sup>** So his brothers said to him, "Leave this place and go to Judea, so your disciples can see the works you’re doing. **<sup>4</sup>** For no one does anything in secret while trying to be known publicly. If you’re doing these things, show yourself to the world." **<sup>5</sup>** For even his brothers did not believe in him. **<sup>6</sup>** Jesus said to them, "My time has not yet come, but your time is always at hand. **<sup>7</sup>** The world cannot hate you, but it hates me because I testify about it—that its works are evil. **<sup>8</sup>** You go up to the festival; I’m not going up to this festival yet, because my time has not yet come." **<sup>9</sup>** After saying this, he remained in Galilee.

**<sup>10</sup>** But after his brothers had gone up to the festival, then he also went up—not publicly, but in private. **<sup>11</sup>** The Jewish leaders were looking for him at the festival and saying, "Where is he?" **<sup>12</sup>** There was a lot of whispering about him among the crowds. Some were saying, "He’s a good man," while others were saying, "No, he’s deceiving the people." **<sup>13</sup>** Still, no one spoke openly about him because they feared the Jewish leaders.

**<sup>14</sup>** When the festival was already half over, Jesus went up to the temple and began to teach. **<sup>15</sup>** The Jewish leaders were amazed and said, "How does this man know so much without having been educated?" **<sup>16</sup>** Jesus answered them, "My teaching isn’t my own, but it comes from the one who sent me. **<sup>17</sup>** If anyone wants to do his will, they’ll know whether my teaching is from God or if I’m speaking on my own. **<sup>18</sup>** The one who speaks on their own seeks their own glory, but the one who seeks the glory of the one who sent him is true, and there’s no unrighteousness in him. **<sup>19</sup>** Didn’t Moses give you the law? Yet none of you keeps the law. Why are you trying to kill me?" **<sup>20</sup>** The crowd answered, "You have a demon! Who’s trying to kill you?" **<sup>21</sup>** Jesus replied, "I did one work, and you’re all astonished. **<sup>22</sup>** Moses gave you circumcision—not that it’s from Moses, but from the forefathers—and you circumcise a man on the Sabbath. **<sup>23</sup>** If a man receives circumcision on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses isn’t broken, why are you angry with me because I made an entire man well on the Sabbath? **<sup>24</sup>** Don’t judge by appearances, but judge with righteous judgment."

**<sup>25</sup>** Then some of the people from Jerusalem started saying, "Isn’t this the one they’re trying to kill? **<sup>26</sup>** Yet here he is, speaking publicly, and they’re saying nothing to him. Could it be that the rulers actually know this is the Messiah? **<sup>27</sup>** But we know where this man is from; when the Messiah comes, no one will know where he’s from." **<sup>28</sup>** So Jesus, while teaching in the temple, cried out, "You know me, and you know where I’m from? I haven’t come on my own, but the one who sent me is true, and you don’t know him. **<sup>29</sup>** I know him because I’m from him, and he sent me." **<sup>30</sup>** Then they tried to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him because his hour had not yet come. **<sup>31</sup>** Yet many among the people believed in him and said, "When the Messiah comes, will he do more signs than this man has done?"

**<sup>32</sup>** The Pharisees heard the people muttering these things about him, and the chief priests and Pharisees sent officers to arrest him. **<sup>33</sup>** Jesus then said, "I’m with you for a little while longer, and then I’m going to the one who sent me. **<sup>34</sup>** You’ll look for me, but you won’t find me, and where I am, you cannot come." **<sup>35</sup>** The Jewish leaders said to one another, "Where’s this man about to go that we won’t find him? Is he going to the Jewish Diaspora among the Greeks and to teach the Greeks? **<sup>36</sup>** What’s this statement he made: ‘You’ll look for me, but you won’t find me, and where I am, you cannot come’?"

**<sup>37</sup>** On the last day, the great day of the festival, Jesus stood and cried out, "If anyone is thirsty, let them come to me and drink. **<sup>38</sup>** The one who believes in me, as the Scripture has said, ‘Out of their heart will flow rivers of living water.’" **<sup>39</sup>** He said this about the Spirit, whom those who believed in him were about to receive, for the Spirit had not yet been given because Jesus had not yet been glorified.

**<sup>40</sup>** Some of the people, after hearing these words, said, "This is truly the Prophet." **<sup>41</sup>** Others said, "This is the Messiah." But some said, "The Messiah doesn’t come from Galilee, does he? **<sup>42</sup>** Doesn’t the Scripture say that the Messiah comes from the offspring of David and from Bethlehem, the village where David was?" **<sup>43</sup>** So a division arose among the people because of him. **<sup>44</sup>** Some of them wanted to arrest him, but no one laid hands on him.

**<sup>45</sup>** Then the officers returned to the chief priests and Pharisees, who said to them, "Why didn’t you bring him?" **<sup>46</sup>** The officers answered, "No one ever spoke like this man!" **<sup>47</sup>** The Pharisees responded, "Have you been deceived too? **<sup>48</sup>** Has any of the rulers or Pharisees believed in him? **<sup>49</sup>** But this crowd, which doesn’t know the law, is cursed." **<sup>50</sup>** Nicodemus, the one who had come to Jesus earlier and was one of them, said to them, **<sup>51</sup>** "Does our law judge a man without first hearing from him and knowing what he’s doing?" **<sup>52</sup>** They replied, "Are you from Galilee too? Search and see that no prophet arises from Galilee."

[The Pericope Adulterae passage from John 7:53 to 8:11 is of doubtful origin.]**<sup>53</sup>** Then each one went to their own home. 

## Chapter 8

**<sup>1</sup>** But Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. **<sup>2</sup>** Early in the morning, he came again to the temple. All the people were coming to him, and he sat down and began to teach them. **<sup>3</sup>** The scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman caught in adultery, and placing her in the middle, **<sup>4</sup>** they said to him, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the very act of committing adultery. **<sup>5</sup>** Now in the Law, Moses commanded us to stone such women. So what do you say?” **<sup>6</sup>** They said this to test him, so they might have something to accuse him of. But Jesus bent down and started writing on the ground with his finger. **<sup>7</sup>** When they kept questioning him, he straightened up and said to them, “Let the one among you who is without sin throw the first stone at her.” **<sup>8</sup>** Then he bent down again and continued writing on the ground. **<sup>9</sup>** When they heard this, they began to leave one by one, starting with the older ones, until only Jesus was left, with the woman still standing there. **<sup>10</sup>** Jesus straightened up and said to her, “Woman, where are they? Has no one condemned you?” **<sup>11</sup>** She said, “No one, Lord.” And Jesus said, “Neither do I condemn you. Go, and from now on, sin no more.”

[End of Pericope Adulterae passage. Most early manuscripts do not contain John 7:53 to 8:11. Those early manuscripts that do contain it mark the passage as if it were added. The earliest known references to the story are from the apocryphal Gospel of the Hebrews. In addition, the stylisms and usage of the Greek language in the text is inconsistent with that of John’s writing. However, the passage is included here for historical purposes.]

**<sup>12</sup>** Again Jesus spoke to them, saying, “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will not walk in darkness but will have the light of life.” **<sup>13</sup>** The Pharisees said to him, “You are testifying about yourself; your testimony is not valid.” **<sup>14</sup>** Jesus answered them, “Even if I testify about myself, my testimony is valid, because I know where I came from and where I am going. But you do not know where I come from or where I am going. **<sup>15</sup>** You judge according to the flesh; I judge no one. **<sup>16</sup>** Yet even if I do judge, my judgment is true, because I am not alone, but I am with the Father who sent me. **<sup>17</sup>** Even in your own Law it is written that the testimony of two people is valid. **<sup>18</sup>** Although I testify about myself, the Father who sent me also testifies about me.” **<sup>19</sup>** Then they said to him, “Where is your Father?” Jesus answered, “You know neither me nor my Father. If you knew me, you would know my Father also.” **<sup>20</sup>** He spoke these words while teaching in the treasury, within the temple, but no one arrested him, because his hour had not yet come.

**<sup>21</sup>** Then he said to them again, “I am going away, and you will look for me, but you will die in your sin. Where I am going, you cannot come.” **<sup>22</sup>** So the Jews said, “Will he kill himself, since he says, ‘Where I am going, you cannot come’?” **<sup>23</sup>** He said to them, “You are from below; I am from above. You are of this world; I am not of this world. **<sup>24</sup>** I told you that you would die in your sins, for unless you believe that I am he, you will die in your sins.” **<sup>25</sup>** They said to him, “Who are you?” Jesus said to them, “Just what I have been telling you from the beginning. **<sup>26</sup>** I have much to say about you and much to judge, but the one who sent me is true, and what I have heard from him, I speak to the world.” **<sup>27</sup>** They did not understand that he was speaking to them about the Father. **<sup>28</sup>** So Jesus said, “When you lift up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and that I do nothing on my own, but I speak just as the Father taught me. **<sup>29</sup>** The one who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone, because I always do what pleases him.” **<sup>30</sup>** As he was saying these things, many believed in him.

**<sup>31</sup>** So Jesus said to the Jews who had believed him, “If you remain in my word, you are truly my disciples, **<sup>32</sup>** and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” **<sup>33</sup>** They answered him, “We are Abraham’s descendants and have never been slaves to anyone. How can you say, ‘You will become free’?” **<sup>34</sup>** Jesus replied to them, “Truly, truly, I tell you, everyone who is committing sin is a slave to sin. **<sup>35</sup>** A slave does not remain in the household forever, but a son remains forever. **<sup>36</sup>** So if the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed. **<sup>37</sup>** I know that you are Abraham’s descendants, but you are trying to kill me because my word finds no place in you. **<sup>38</sup>** I speak what I have seen with my Father, and you do what you have heard from your father.”

**<sup>39</sup>** They answered him, “Abraham is our father.” Jesus said to them, “If you were Abraham’s children, you would do the works of Abraham. **<sup>40</sup>** But now you are trying to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God. Abraham did not do this. **<sup>41</sup>** You are doing the works of your father.” They said to him, “We were not born of sexual immorality. We have one Father—God.” **<sup>42</sup>** Jesus said to them, “If God were your Father, you would love me, for I came from God and am here. I did not come on my own, but he sent me. **<sup>43</sup>** Why do you not understand what I am saying? It is because you cannot bear to hear my word. **<sup>44</sup>** You are of your father the devil, and you want to carry out your father’s desires. He was a murderer from the beginning and does not stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he lies, he speaks from his own nature, for he is a liar and the father of lies. **<sup>45</sup>** But because I tell the truth, you do not believe me. **<sup>46</sup>** Which one of you can prove me guilty of sin? If I am telling the truth, why do you not believe me? **<sup>47</sup>** Whoever is of God hears the words of God. The reason you do not hear them is that you are not of God.”

**<sup>48</sup>** The Jews answered him, “Aren’t we right in saying that you are a Samaritan and have a demon?” **<sup>49</sup>** Jesus replied, “I do not have a demon, but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me. **<sup>50</sup>** I am not seeking my own glory; there is one who seeks it, and he is the judge. **<sup>51</sup>** Truly, truly, I tell you, if anyone keeps my word, he will never see death.” **<sup>52</sup>** The Jews said to him, “Now we know you have a demon! Abraham died, and so did the prophets, yet you say, ‘If anyone keeps my word, he will never taste death.’ **<sup>53</sup>** Are you greater than our father Abraham, who died? And the prophets died too! Who do you make yourself out to be?” **<sup>54</sup>** Jesus answered, “If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say, ‘He is our God.’ **<sup>55</sup>** But you have not known him. I know him. If I said I did not know him, I would be a liar like you, but I do know him and keep his word. **<sup>56</sup>** Your father Abraham rejoiced that he would see my day. He saw it and was glad.” **<sup>57</sup>** So the Jews said to him, “You are not yet fifty years old, and you have seen Abraham?” **<sup>58</sup>** Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I tell you, before Abraham was, I AM.” **<sup>59</sup>** Then they picked up stones to throw at him, but Jesus hid himself and went out of the temple. 

## Chapter 9

**<sup>1</sup>** Now as he was passing by, Jesus saw a man blind from birth. **<sup>2</sup>** And his disciples asked him, saying, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?” **<sup>3</sup>** Jesus answered, “Neither this man nor his parents sinned, but this happened so that the works of God might be revealed in him. **<sup>4</sup>** We must work the works of the one who sent me while it is day; night is coming when no one can work. **<sup>5</sup>** As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.” **<sup>6</sup>** Having said these things, he spat on the ground and made mud with the saliva, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the mud. **<sup>7</sup>** And he said to him, “Go, wash in the pool of Siloam” (which is translated “Sent”). So he went away and washed, and came back seeing.

**<sup>8</sup>** Then the neighbors and those who had seen him before as a beggar were saying, “Isn’t this the man who was sitting and begging?” **<sup>9</sup>** Some were saying, “It is him”; others were saying, “No, but he is like him.” He kept saying, “I am the one.” **<sup>10</sup>** So they were saying to him, “How, then, were your eyes opened?” **<sup>11</sup>** He answered, “The man called Jesus made mud and anointed my eyes and said to me, ‘Go to Siloam and wash.’ So I went and washed and received my sight.” **<sup>12</sup>** They said to him, “Where is he?” He said, “I do not know.”

**<sup>13</sup>** They brought him, the one who was formerly blind, to the Pharisees. **<sup>14</sup>** Now it was a Sabbath day when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes. **<sup>15</sup>** So the Pharisees again asked him how he had received his sight. And he said to them, “He put mud on my eyes, and I washed, and I see.” **<sup>16</sup>** Some of the Pharisees were saying, “This man is not from God, because he does not keep the Sabbath.” But others were saying, “How can a man who is a sinner perform such signs?” And there was a division among them. **<sup>17</sup>** So they said again to the blind man, “What do you say about him, since he opened your eyes?” He said, “He is a prophet.”

**<sup>18</sup>** The Jews did not believe concerning him that he had been blind and had received his sight, until they called the parents of the one who had received his sight. **<sup>19</sup>** And they asked them, saying, “Is this your son, whom you say was born blind? How, then, does he now see?” **<sup>20</sup>** His parents answered and said, “We know that this is our son and that he was born blind, **<sup>21</sup>** but how he now sees we do not know, or who opened his eyes we do not know. Ask him; he is of age, he will speak for himself.” **<sup>22</sup>** His parents said these things because they feared the Jews, for the Jews had already agreed that if anyone confessed him to be the Christ, he would be put out of the synagogue. **<sup>23</sup>** For this reason his parents said, “He is of age; ask him.”

**<sup>24</sup>** So for a second time they called the man who had been blind and said to him, “Give glory to God; we know that this man is a sinner.” **<sup>25</sup>** He then answered, “Whether he is a sinner I do not know; one thing I do know, that though I was blind, now I see.” **<sup>26</sup>** They said to him, “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?” **<sup>27</sup>** He answered them, “I told you already, and you did not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Do you also want to become his disciples?” **<sup>28</sup>** And they reviled him and said, “You are a disciple of that man, but we are disciples of Moses. **<sup>29</sup>** We know that God has spoken to Moses, but as for this man, we do not know where he is from.” **<sup>30</sup>** The man answered and said to them, “Well, here is an astonishing thing, that you do not know where he is from, and yet he opened my eyes. **<sup>31</sup>** We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if anyone is God-fearing and does his will, he listens to him. **<sup>32</sup>** Never since the world began has it been heard that anyone opened the eyes of a man born blind. **<sup>33</sup>** If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.” **<sup>34</sup>** They answered and said to him, “You were completely born in sin, and are you teaching us?” And they cast him out.

**<sup>35</sup>** Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and finding him, he said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?” **<sup>36</sup>** He answered and said, “And who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?” **<sup>37</sup>** Jesus said to him, “You have both seen him, and it is he who is speaking with you.” **<sup>38</sup>** And he said, “Lord, I believe,” and he worshiped him. **<sup>39</sup>** And Jesus said, “For judgment I came into this world, so that those who do not see may see, and those who see may become blind.” **<sup>40</sup>** Some of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things and said to him, “We are not blind too, are we?” **<sup>41</sup>** Jesus said to them, “If you were blind, you would have no sin; but now that you say, ‘We see,’ your sin remains.” 

## Chapter 10

**<sup>1</sup>** "Truly, truly, I tell you, anyone who does not enter the sheepfold through the door but climbs in some other way is a thief and a robber. **<sup>2</sup>** But the one who enters through the door is the shepherd of the sheep. **<sup>3</sup>** The gatekeeper opens it for him, and the sheep hear his voice; he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. **<sup>4</sup>** When he has brought out all his own, he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him because they know his voice. **<sup>5</sup>** They will never follow a stranger; instead, they will flee from him because they do not recognize the voice of strangers." **<sup>6</sup>** Jesus spoke this figure of speech to them, but they did not understand what he was saying to them.

**<sup>7</sup>** So Jesus said to them again, "Truly, truly, I tell you, I AM the door for the sheep. **<sup>8</sup>** All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them. **<sup>9</sup>** I AM the door. If anyone enters through me, he will be saved and will go in and out and find pasture. **<sup>10</sup>** The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy; I came so that they may have life and have it abundantly.

**<sup>11</sup>** I AM the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. **<sup>12</sup>** The hired hand, who is not a shepherd and does not own the sheep, sees the wolf coming, abandons the sheep, and flees—and the wolf snatches them and scatters them. **<sup>13</sup>** He flees because he is a hired hand and does not care about the sheep. **<sup>14</sup>** I AM the good shepherd, and I know my own, and my own know me, **<sup>15</sup>** just as the Father knows me and I know the Father—and I lay down my life for the sheep. **<sup>16</sup>** I also have other sheep that are not from this fold; I must bring them too, and they will listen to my voice, and there will be one flock, one shepherd. **<sup>17</sup>** For this reason the Father loves me, because I lay down my life so that I may take it up again. **<sup>18</sup>** No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it up again. This command I received from my Father."

**<sup>19</sup>** Again, a division arose among the Jews because of these words. **<sup>20</sup>** Many of them were saying, "He has a demon and is out of his mind! Why listen to him?" **<sup>21</sup>** Others said, "These are not the words of someone possessed by a demon. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?"

**<sup>22</sup>** At that time, the Feast of Dedication took place in Jerusalem. It was winter, **<sup>23</sup>** and Jesus was walking in the temple, in the colonnade of Solomon. **<sup>24</sup>** So the Jews gathered around him and said to him, "How long will you keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly." **<sup>25</sup>** Jesus answered them, "I told you, and you do not believe. The works I do in my Father’s name testify about me, **<sup>26</sup>** but you do not believe because you are not among my sheep. **<sup>27</sup>** My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. **<sup>28</sup>** I give them eternal life, and they will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand. **<sup>29</sup>** My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all, and no one can snatch them out of the Father’s hand. **<sup>30</sup>** I and the Father are one."

**<sup>31</sup>** The Jews picked up stones again to stone him. **<sup>32</sup>** Jesus responded to them, "I have shown you many good works from the Father; for which of them are you going to stone me?" **<sup>33</sup>** The Jews answered him, "We are not stoning you for a good work, but for blasphemy, because you, being a man, make yourself God." **<sup>34</sup>** Jesus replied to them, "Is it not written in your Law, ‘I said, you are gods’? **<sup>35</sup>** If he called those to whom the word of God came ‘gods’—and the Scripture cannot be broken— **<sup>36</sup>** do you say of the one whom the Father consecrated and sent into the world, ‘You are blaspheming,’ because I said, ‘I am the Son of God’? **<sup>37</sup>** If I am not doing the works of my Father, then do not believe me; **<sup>38</sup>** but if I am doing them, even if you do not believe me, believe the works, so that you may know and understand that the Father is in me and I am in the Father." **<sup>39</sup>** Then they tried again to seize him, but he escaped from their hands.

**<sup>40</sup>** He went away again across the Jordan to the place where John had been baptizing earlier, and he stayed there. **<sup>41</sup>** Many came to him and were saying, "John performed no sign, but everything John said about this man was true." **<sup>42</sup>** And many believed in him there. 

## Chapter 11

**<sup>1</sup>** Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus from Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha. **<sup>2</sup>** This Mary was the one who anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was ill. **<sup>3</sup>** So the sisters sent word to him, saying, “Lord, the one you love is sick.” **<sup>4</sup>** When Jesus heard this, he said, “This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified through it.” **<sup>5</sup>** Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus. **<sup>6</sup>** Yet when he heard that Lazarus was sick, he stayed where he was for two more days.

**<sup>7</sup>** Then after this, he said to the disciples, “Let’s go to Judea again.” **<sup>8</sup>** The disciples said to him, “Rabbi, the Jews were just now trying to stone you, and you’re going back there?” **<sup>9</sup>** Jesus answered, “Aren’t there twelve hours in a day? If anyone walks during the day, they don’t stumble, because they see the light of this world. **<sup>10</sup>** But if anyone walks at night, they stumble, because the light isn’t in them.” **<sup>11</sup>** After saying this, he told them, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I’m going there to wake him up.” **<sup>12</sup>** The disciples said to him, “Lord, if he’s fallen asleep, he’ll recover.” **<sup>13</sup>** Now Jesus had spoken about his death, but they thought he was talking about the rest of sleep. **<sup>14</sup>** So Jesus then said to them plainly, “Lazarus is dead, **<sup>15</sup>** and I’m glad for your sake that I wasn’t there, so that you may believe. But let’s go to him.” **<sup>16</sup>** Then Thomas, the one called the Twin, said to his fellow disciples, “Let’s go too, so we can die with him.”

**<sup>17</sup>** When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had already been in the tomb for four days. **<sup>18</sup>** Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about two miles away, **<sup>19</sup>** and many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to console them about their brother. **<sup>20</sup>** When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went out to meet him, but Mary stayed seated in the house. **<sup>21</sup>** Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother wouldn’t have died. **<sup>22</sup>** But even now, I know that whatever you ask from God, He will give you.” **<sup>23</sup>** Jesus said to her, “Your brother will rise again.” **<sup>24</sup>** Martha replied, “I know he’ll rise again in the resurrection on the last day.” **<sup>25</sup>** Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. The one who believes in me, even if they die, will live, **<sup>26</sup>** and everyone who lives and believes in me will never die forever. Do you believe this?” **<sup>27</sup>** She said to him, “Yes, Lord, I’ve come to believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, the one coming into the world.”

**<sup>28</sup>** After saying this, she went back and called her sister Mary privately, saying, “The Teacher is here and is calling for you.” **<sup>29</sup>** When Mary heard this, she got up quickly and went to him. **<sup>30</sup>** Now Jesus had not yet entered the village but was still at the place where Martha had met him. **<sup>31</sup>** The Jews who were with her in the house, consoling her, saw Mary get up quickly and leave, so they followed her, thinking she was going to the tomb to weep there. **<sup>32</sup>** When Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet, saying, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother wouldn’t have died.” **<sup>33</sup>** When Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who had come with her also weeping, he was deeply moved in spirit and troubled. **<sup>34</sup>** He said, “Where have you laid him?” They replied, “Lord, come and see.” **<sup>35</sup>** Jesus wept. **<sup>36</sup>** So the Jews said, “See how he loved him!” **<sup>37</sup>** But some of them said, “Couldn’t this man, who opened the eyes of the blind, have kept this man from dying?”

**<sup>38</sup>** Then Jesus, again deeply moved within himself, came to the tomb. It was a cave, and a stone was lying against it. **<sup>39</sup>** Jesus said, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the sister of the deceased, said to him, “Lord, by now there’s a stench—he’s been dead four days.” **<sup>40</sup>** Jesus said to her, “Didn’t I tell you that if you believe, you’ll see the glory of God?” **<sup>41</sup>** So they took away the stone. Jesus lifted his eyes upward and said, “Father, I thank you that you’ve heard me. **<sup>42</sup>** I knew that you always hear me, but I said this for the sake of the crowd standing here, so they may believe that you sent me.” **<sup>43</sup>** After saying this, he cried out with a loud voice, “Lazarus, come out!” **<sup>44</sup>** The man who had died came out, his hands and feet bound with linen strips, and his face wrapped in a cloth. Jesus said to them, “Unbind him and let him go.”

**<sup>45</sup>** Then many of the Jews who had come to Mary and seen what he did believed in him. **<sup>46</sup>** But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done. **<sup>47</sup>** So the chief priests and the Pharisees convened the council and said, “What are we going to do? This man is performing many signs. **<sup>48</sup>** If we let him go on like this, everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation.” **<sup>49</sup>** But one of them, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them, “You know nothing at all! **<sup>50</sup>** You don’t realize that it’s better for you that one man die for the people than that the whole nation perish.” **<sup>51</sup>** He didn’t say this on his own, but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the nation, **<sup>52</sup>** and not only for the nation, but also to gather into one the children of God who were scattered abroad. **<sup>53</sup>** So from that day on, they plotted to kill him.

**<sup>54</sup>** Jesus, therefore, no longer walked openly among the Jews but went from there to a region near the wilderness, to a town called Ephraim, and he stayed there with his disciples. **<sup>55</sup>** Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and many went up to Jerusalem from the countryside before the Passover to purify themselves. **<sup>56</sup>** They were looking for Jesus and saying to one another as they stood in the temple, “What do you think? That he won’t come to the festival at all?” **<sup>57</sup>** The chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if anyone knew where he was, they should report it, so they could arrest him. 

## Chapter 12

**<sup>1</sup>** Six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had raised from the dead. **<sup>2</sup>** So they made him a dinner there, and Martha was serving, while Lazarus was one of those reclining at the table with him. **<sup>3</sup>** Then Mary took a pound of very expensive perfume made of pure nard, anointed Jesus’ feet, and wiped his feet with her hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of the perfume. **<sup>4</sup>** But Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples (the one who was about to betray him), said, **<sup>5</sup>** “Why wasn’t this perfume sold for three hundred denarii and the money given to the poor?” **<sup>6</sup>** He said this not because he cared about the poor, but because he was a thief; he kept the money bag and used to steal what was put into it. **<sup>7</sup>** Jesus said, “Leave her alone; she has kept it for the day of my burial. **<sup>8</sup>** For you always have the poor with you, but you do not always have me.”

**<sup>9</sup>** Now a large crowd of the Jews learned that he was there, and they came not only because of Jesus but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. **<sup>10</sup>** But the chief priests planned to kill Lazarus as well, **<sup>11</sup>** because on account of him many of the Jews were going away and believing in Jesus.

**<sup>12</sup>** The next day the large crowd that had come to the feast heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem. **<sup>13</sup>** So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him, shouting, “Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, even the King of Israel!” **<sup>14</sup>** Jesus found a young donkey and sat on it, as it is written, **<sup>15</sup>** “Do not be afraid, daughter of Zion; behold, your king is coming, sitting on a donkey’s colt!” **<sup>16</sup>** His disciples did not understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written about him and that they had done these things to him. **<sup>17</sup>** The crowd that had been with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead continued to bear witness. **<sup>18</sup>** This was also why the crowd went to meet him, because they heard he had performed this sign. **<sup>19</sup>** So the Pharisees said to one another, “You see that you are accomplishing nothing. Look, the world has gone after him!”

**<sup>20</sup>** Now some Greeks were among those who went up to worship at the feast. **<sup>21</sup>** They came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, and asked him, “Sir, we want to see Jesus.” **<sup>22</sup>** Philip went and told Andrew; Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus. **<sup>23</sup>** Jesus answered them, “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. **<sup>24</sup>** Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit. **<sup>25</sup>** Whoever loves his life loses it, and whoever hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life. **<sup>26</sup>** If anyone serves me, he must follow me; and where I am, there my servant will be also. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.

**<sup>27</sup>** “Now my soul is troubled, and what shall I say? ‘Father, save me from this hour’? No, it was for this very reason I came to this hour. **<sup>28</sup>** Father, glorify your name.” Then a voice came from heaven, “I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again.” **<sup>29</sup>** The crowd standing there heard it and said it had thundered; others said, “An angel has spoken to him.” **<sup>30</sup>** Jesus answered, “This voice has come for your sake, not mine. **<sup>31</sup>** Now is the judgment of this world; now the ruler of this world will be cast out. **<sup>32</sup>** And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.” **<sup>33</sup>** He said this to indicate the kind of death he was going to die.

**<sup>34</sup>** The crowd answered him, “We have heard from the Law that the Christ remains forever. How can you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?” **<sup>35</sup>** So Jesus said to them, “The light is among you for a little while longer. Walk while you have the light, lest darkness overtake you. The one who walks in the darkness does not know where he is going. **<sup>36</sup>** While you have the light, believe in the light, so that you may become sons of light.” After saying these things, Jesus went away and hid himself from them.

**<sup>37</sup>** Though he had performed so many signs in their presence, they still did not believe in him, **<sup>38</sup>** so that the word spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled: “Lord, who has believed our message, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?” **<sup>39</sup>** For this reason they could not believe, because Isaiah also said, **<sup>40</sup>** “He has blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, lest they see with their eyes and understand with their heart and turn, and I would heal them.” **<sup>41</sup>** Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory and spoke about him. **<sup>42</sup>** Nevertheless, many even of the rulers believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess it, so that they would not be put out of the synagogue; **<sup>43</sup>** for they loved the glory that comes from men more than the glory that comes from God.

**<sup>44</sup>** Jesus cried out and said, “Whoever believes in me believes not in me but in him who sent me. **<sup>45</sup>** And whoever sees me sees him who sent me. **<sup>46</sup>** I have come into the world as light, so that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness. **<sup>47</sup>** If anyone hears my words and does not keep them, I do not judge him; for I did not come to judge the world but to save the world. **<sup>48</sup>** The one who rejects me and does not receive my words has a judge; the word that I have spoken will judge him on the last day. **<sup>49</sup>** For I have not spoken on my own authority, but the Father who sent me has himself given me a commandment—what to say and what to speak. **<sup>50</sup>** And I know that his commandment is eternal life. What I say, therefore, I say as the Father has told me.” 

## Chapter 13

**<sup>1</sup>** Now before the Feast of the Passover, Jesus, knowing that his hour had come to depart from this world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end. **<sup>2</sup>** And during supper, when the devil had already put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, to betray him, **<sup>3</sup>** Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands and that he had come from God and was going back to God, **<sup>4</sup>** rose from supper, laid aside his outer garments, took a towel, and tied it around himself. **<sup>5</sup>** Then he poured water into a basin and began to wash the disciples’ feet and to wipe them with the towel that was tied around him. **<sup>6</sup>** He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, “Lord, are you going to wash my feet?” **<sup>7</sup>** Jesus answered and said to him, “What I am doing you do not understand now, but you will understand later.” **<sup>8</sup>** Peter said to him, “You will never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him, “If I do not wash you, you have no share with me.” **<sup>9</sup>** Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, not only my feet, but also my hands and my head!” **<sup>10</sup>** Jesus said to him, “The one who has bathed does not need to wash, except for his feet, but is completely clean. And you are clean, but not all of you.” **<sup>11</sup>** For he knew who would betray him; that was why he said, “Not all of you are clean.”

**<sup>12</sup>** When he had washed their feet and put on his outer garments again, he reclined at the table and said to them, “Do you understand what I have done for you? **<sup>13</sup>** You call me ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord,’ and you are right, for I am. **<sup>14</sup>** If I, then, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another’s feet. **<sup>15</sup>** For I have given you an example, that you should do just as I have done for you. **<sup>16</sup>** Truly, truly, I say to you, a servant is not greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him. **<sup>17</sup>** If you know these things, you are blessed if you do them. **<sup>18</sup>** I am not speaking about all of you; I know whom I have chosen. But this is to fulfill the Scripture: ‘The one who eats my bread has lifted his heel against me.’ **<sup>19</sup>** I am telling you this now, before it happens, so that when it does happen, you may believe that I am he. **<sup>20</sup>** Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever receives the one I send receives me, and whoever receives me receives the one who sent me.”

**<sup>21</sup>** After saying these things, Jesus was troubled in spirit and testified, “Truly, truly, I say to you, one of you will betray me.” **<sup>22</sup>** The disciples looked at one another, uncertain about whom he was speaking. **<sup>23</sup>** One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was reclining close to Jesus’ side. **<sup>24</sup>** Simon Peter motioned to him to ask who it was that he was speaking about. **<sup>25</sup>** So that disciple, leaning close to Jesus, said to him, “Lord, who is it?” **<sup>26</sup>** Jesus answered, “It is the one to whom I will give this piece of bread after I have dipped it.” Then, having dipped the bread, he gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. **<sup>27</sup>** After he took the bread, Satan entered into him. Jesus said to him, “What you are going to do, do quickly.” **<sup>28</sup>** Now no one at the table knew why he said this to him. **<sup>29</sup>** Some thought that because Judas had the moneybag, Jesus was telling him, “Buy what we need for the feast,” or that he should give something to the poor. **<sup>30</sup>** So, after taking the bread, he immediately went out. And it was night.

**<sup>31</sup>** When he had gone out, Jesus said, “Now the Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in him. **<sup>32</sup>** If God is glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him at once. **<sup>33</sup>** Little children, I am with you only a little longer. You will look for me, and just as I said to the Jews, so now I say to you, ‘Where I am going, you cannot come.’ **<sup>34</sup>** A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, you also are to love one another. **<sup>35</sup>** By this all people will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another.”

**<sup>36</sup>** Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus answered him, “Where I am going, you cannot follow me now, but you will follow later.” **<sup>37</sup>** Peter said to him, “Lord, why can’t I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.” **<sup>38</sup>** Jesus answered, “Will you lay down your life for me? Truly, truly, I say to you, the rooster will not crow until you have denied me three times.” 

## Chapter 14

**<sup>1</sup>** "Do not let your hearts be troubled. Believe in God; believe also in me. **<sup>2</sup>** In my Father’s house there are many rooms. If it were not so, would I have told you that I am going to prepare a place for you? **<sup>3</sup>** And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back and take you to be with me, so that where I am, you may be also. **<sup>4</sup>** And you know the way to where I am going." **<sup>5</sup>** Thomas said to him, "Lord, we don’t know where you’re going. How can we know the way?" **<sup>6</sup>** Jesus said to him, "I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. **<sup>7</sup>** If you have known me, you will know my Father also. From now on you do know him and have seen him." **<sup>8</sup>** Philip said to him, "Lord, show us the Father, and that will be enough for us." **<sup>9</sup>** Jesus said to him, "Have I been with you all this time, Philip, and you still don’t know me? The one who has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’? **<sup>10</sup>** Don’t you believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I say to you I do not speak on my own, but the Father who dwells in me does his works. **<sup>11</sup>** Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father is in me—or else believe because of the works themselves. **<sup>12</sup>** Truly, truly, I tell you, the one who believes in me will also do the works that I do, and will do even greater works than these, because I am going to the Father. **<sup>13</sup>** And whatever you ask in my name, I will do it, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son. **<sup>14</sup>** If you ask me anything in my name, I will do it. **<sup>15</sup>** If you love me, you will keep my commandments. **<sup>16</sup>** And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Advocate to be with you forever— **<sup>17</sup>** the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot accept because it neither sees nor knows him. But you know him, because he remains with you and will be in you. **<sup>18</sup>** I will not leave you as orphans; I will come to you. **<sup>19</sup>** In a little while the world will no longer see me, but you will see me. Because I live, you also will live. **<sup>20</sup>** On that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you. **<sup>21</sup>** The one who has my commandments and keeps them is the one who loves me. And the one who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and reveal myself to him." **<sup>22</sup>** Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, "Lord, how is it that you will reveal yourself to us and not to the world?" **<sup>23</sup>** Jesus answered and said to him, "If anyone loves me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him. **<sup>24</sup>** The one who does not love me does not keep my words. And the word that you hear is not mine, but the Father’s who sent me. **<sup>25</sup>** I have said these things to you while I am still with you. **<sup>26</sup>** But the Advocate, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you everything and remind you of all that I have said to you. **<sup>27</sup>** Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled, and do not let them be afraid. **<sup>28</sup>** You heard me say to you, ‘I am going away, and I will come back to you.’ If you loved me, you would rejoice that I am going to the Father, because the Father is greater than I. **<sup>29</sup>** And now I have told you before it happens, so that when it does happen, you may believe. **<sup>30</sup>** I will not speak with you much longer, for the ruler of this world is coming. He has no power over me, **<sup>31</sup>** but I do as the Father has commanded me, so that the world may know that I love the Father. Get up, let’s go from here." 

## Chapter 15

**<sup>1</sup>** "I am the true vine, and my Father is the gardener. **<sup>2</sup>** Every branch in me that does not bear fruit, he removes, and every branch that does bear fruit, he prunes so that it may bear more fruit. **<sup>3</sup>** You are already clean because of the word I have spoken to you. **<sup>4</sup>** Remain in me, and I will remain in you. Just as a branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it remains in the vine, neither can you unless you remain in me. **<sup>5</sup>** I am the vine; you are the branches. The one who remains in me and I in him—this one bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing. **<sup>6</sup>** If anyone does not remain in me, he is thrown out like a branch and withers; and they gather them and throw them into the fire, and they are burned. **<sup>7</sup>** If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you want, and it will be done for you. **<sup>8</sup>** By this my Father is glorified, that you bear much fruit and prove to be my disciples. **<sup>9</sup>** Just as the Father has loved me, I also have loved you; remain in my love. **<sup>10</sup>** If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father’s commandments and remain in his love. **<sup>11</sup>** I have told you these things so that my joy may be in you and your joy may be complete. **<sup>12</sup>** This is my commandment: that you love one another just as I have loved you. **<sup>13</sup>** No one has greater love than this, that someone would lay down his life for his friends. **<sup>14</sup>** You are my friends if you do what I command you. **<sup>15</sup>** I no longer call you slaves, because a slave does not know what his master is doing; but I have called you friends, because everything I heard from my Father I have made known to you. **<sup>16</sup>** You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you so that you would go and bear fruit, and that your fruit would remain, so that whatever you ask the Father in my name he may give you. **<sup>17</sup>** These things I command you, so that you will love one another. **<sup>18</sup>** If the world hates you, know that it hated me before it hated you. **<sup>19</sup>** If you were of the world, the world would love its own; but because you are not of the world—since I chose you out of the world—for this reason the world hates you. **<sup>20</sup>** Remember the word I spoke to you: ‘A slave is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will persecute you too; if they kept my word, they will keep yours too. **<sup>21</sup>** But they will do all these things to you because of my name, because they do not know the one who sent me. **<sup>22</sup>** If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin. **<sup>23</sup>** The one who hates me hates my Father also. **<sup>24</sup>** If I had not done among them the works that no one else did, they would not have sin; but now they have seen and hated both me and my Father. **<sup>25</sup>** But this happened so that the word written in their Law might be fulfilled: ‘They hated me without cause.’ **<sup>26</sup>** When the Advocate comes, whom I will send to you from the Father—the Spirit of truth who proceeds from the Father—he will testify about me. **<sup>27</sup>** And you also will testify, because you have been with me from the beginning." 

## Chapter 16

**<sup>1</sup>** "I’ve told you these things so you won’t stumble. **<sup>2</sup>** They’ll expel you from the synagogues; in fact, a time is coming when anyone who kills you will think they’re offering a service to God. **<sup>3</sup>** They’ll do this because they haven’t known the Father or me. **<sup>4</sup>** But I’ve said these things to you so that when their time comes, you’ll remember that I warned you about them. I didn’t tell you this at first because I was with you.

**<sup>5</sup>** “But now I’m going to the one who sent me, and none of you asks me, ‘Where are you going?’ **<sup>6</sup>** Instead, because I’ve said these things to you, sorrow has filled your hearts. **<sup>7</sup>** But I’m telling you the truth: it’s better for you that I go away. If I don’t go, the Advocate won’t come to you; but if I do go, I’ll send him to you. **<sup>8</sup>** And when he comes, he’ll expose the world’s guilt regarding sin, righteousness, and judgment: **<sup>9</sup>** about sin, because they don’t believe in me; **<sup>10</sup>** about righteousness, because I’m going to the Father and you won’t see me anymore; **<sup>11</sup>** and about judgment, because the ruler of this world has been judged.

**<sup>12</sup>** I still have many things to say to you, but you can’t handle them now. **<sup>13</sup>** When he, the Spirit of truth, comes, he’ll guide you into all truth. He won’t speak on his own; he’ll speak what he hears and will tell you what’s yet to come. **<sup>14</sup>** He’ll glorify me because he’ll take what’s mine and make it known to you. **<sup>15</sup>** Everything the Father has is mine; that’s why I said he’ll take what’s mine and make it known to you.

**<sup>16</sup>** In a little while, you won’t see me anymore, and then after a little while, you’ll see me again. **<sup>17</sup>** So some of his disciples said to each other, ‘What does he mean by telling us, “In a little while, you won’t see me, and then after a little while, you’ll see me,” and “Because I’m going to the Father”?’ **<sup>18</sup>** They kept saying, ‘What’s this “little while” he’s talking about? We don’t get what he’s saying.’

**<sup>19</sup>** Jesus knew they wanted to ask him, so he said to them, ‘Are you discussing among yourselves what I meant when I said, “In a little while, you won’t see me, and then after a little while, you’ll see me”? **<sup>20</sup>** I’m telling you the truth: you’ll weep and mourn while the world celebrates. You’ll grieve, but your grief will turn into joy. **<sup>21</sup>** When a woman’s giving birth, she’s in pain because her time has come; but once the baby’s born, she forgets the anguish because of her joy that a child’s come into the world. **<sup>22</sup>** So it is with you: right now you’re grieving, but I’ll see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy away from you.

**<sup>23</sup>** On that day, you won’t ask me anything. I’m telling you the truth: whatever you ask the Father in my name, he’ll give you. **<sup>24</sup>** Up till now, you haven’t asked for anything in my name. Ask, and you’ll receive, so your joy can be complete.

**<sup>25</sup>** I’ve been speaking to you in figures of speech; a time’s coming when I won’t use figures of speech anymore but will tell you plainly about the Father. **<sup>26</sup>** In that day, you’ll ask in my name, and I’m not saying I’ll ask the Father on your behalf; **<sup>27</sup>** for the Father himself loves you because you’ve loved me and believed that I came from God. **<sup>28</sup>** I came from the Father and entered the world; now I’m leaving the world and going back to the Father.”

**<sup>29</sup>** His disciples said, “Look, now you’re speaking plainly and not using figures of speech! **<sup>30</sup>** Now we’re sure you know everything and don’t need anyone to question you. This makes us believe you came from God.” **<sup>31</sup>** Jesus answered them, “Do you believe now? **<sup>32</sup>** Look, a time’s coming—and it’s here—when you’ll scatter, each to your own place, and leave me alone. But I’m not alone, because the Father’s with me. **<sup>33</sup>** I’ve told you these things so you can have peace in me. In the world, you’ll face trouble. But take heart—I’ve overcome the world.” 

## Chapter 17

**<sup>1</sup>** Jesus said these things, and lifting his eyes to heaven, he said, “Father, the hour has come. Glorify your Son so that the Son may glorify you, **<sup>2</sup>** just as you gave him authority over all flesh, so that he might give eternal life to all those you have given him. **<sup>3</sup>** And this is eternal life: that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent. **<sup>4</sup>** I glorified you on earth by completing the work you gave me to do. **<sup>5</sup>** And now, Father, glorify me in your presence with the glory I had with you before the world existed.

**<sup>6</sup>** I have revealed your name to the people you gave me out of the world. They were yours, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your word. **<sup>7</sup>** Now they know that everything you have given me comes from you, **<sup>8</sup>** because I have given them the words you gave me, and they accepted them. They truly understood that I came from you, and they believed that you sent me. **<sup>9</sup>** I am praying for them. I am not praying for the world, but for those you have given me, because they are yours. **<sup>10</sup>** All that is mine is yours, and all that is yours is mine, and I have been glorified in them.

**<sup>11</sup>** I am no longer in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, protect them by the power of your name—the name you gave me—so that they may be one, just as we are one. **<sup>12</sup>** While I was with them, I protected them by the power of your name that you gave me. I guarded them, and not one of them was lost, except the son of destruction, so that the Scripture might be fulfilled. **<sup>13</sup>** But now I am coming to you, and I am saying these things in the world so that they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves.

**<sup>14</sup>** I have given them your word, and the world has hated them because they do not belong to the world, just as I do not belong to the world. **<sup>15</sup>** I am not asking you to take them out of the world, but to protect them from the evil one. **<sup>16</sup>** They do not belong to the world, just as I do not belong to the world. **<sup>17</sup>** Sanctify them in the truth; your word is truth. **<sup>18</sup>** Just as you sent me into the world, I also have sent them into the world. **<sup>19</sup>** And for their sake, I sanctify myself, so that they too may be sanctified in truth.

**<sup>20</sup>** I am not praying only for these, but also for those who will believe in me through their word, **<sup>21</sup>** that they may all be one, just as you, Father, are in me and I am in you, that they also may be in us, so that the world may believe that you sent me. **<sup>22</sup>** I have given them the glory you gave me, so that they may be one, just as we are one— **<sup>23</sup>** I in them and you in me—that they may be brought to complete unity, so that the world may know that you sent me and that you loved them just as you loved me.

**<sup>24</sup>** Father, I want those you have given me to be with me where I am, so that they may see my glory, which you gave me because you loved me before the foundation of the world. **<sup>25</sup>** Righteous Father, the world does not know you, but I know you, and these know that you sent me. **<sup>26</sup>** I made your name known to them, and I will continue to make it known, so that the love with which you loved me may be in them, and I in them.” 

## Chapter 18

**<sup>1</sup>** After saying these things, Jesus went out with his disciples across the Kidron Valley, where there was a garden, which he and his disciples entered. **<sup>2</sup>** Now Judas, the one betraying him, also knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples. **<sup>3</sup>** So Judas, taking the detachment of soldiers and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, came there with lanterns, torches, and weapons. **<sup>4</sup>** Jesus, knowing everything that was coming upon him, went out and said to them, “Who are you looking for?” **<sup>5</sup>** They answered him, “Jesus the Nazarene.” He said to them, “I am he.” Judas, the one betraying him, was also standing with them. **<sup>6</sup>** When he said to them, “I am he,” they stepped back and fell to the ground. **<sup>7</sup>** So he asked them again, “Who are you looking for?” And they said, “Jesus the Nazarene.” **<sup>8</sup>** Jesus replied, “I told you that I am he. If you’re looking for me, let these men go.” **<sup>9</sup>** This happened so that the word he had spoken might be fulfilled: “Of those you gave me, I have not lost a single one.”

**<sup>10</sup>** Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it and struck the high priest’s servant, cutting off his right ear. The servant’s name was Malchus. **<sup>11</sup>** Jesus said to Peter, “Put the sword back into its sheath. Shall I not drink the cup that the Father has given me?”

**<sup>12</sup>** Then the detachment of soldiers, their commander, and the officers of the Jews arrested Jesus and bound him. **<sup>13</sup>** They led him first to Annas, for he was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was the high priest that year. **<sup>14</sup>** It was Caiaphas who had advised the Jews that it was better for one man to die for the people.

**<sup>15</sup>** Simon Peter and another disciple followed Jesus. That disciple was known to the high priest and entered with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest. **<sup>16</sup>** But Peter stood outside at the gate. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out, spoke to the servant girl watching the gate, and brought Peter in. **<sup>17</sup>** The servant girl at the gate said to Peter, “You’re not one of this man’s disciples too, are you?” He said, “I am not.” **<sup>18</sup>** Now the servants and officers had made a charcoal fire because it was cold, and they were standing there warming themselves. Peter was also standing with them, warming himself.

**<sup>19</sup>** Meanwhile, the high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and his teaching. **<sup>20</sup>** Jesus answered him, “I have spoken openly to the world. I always taught in synagogues and in the temple, where all the Jews come together, and I said nothing in secret. **<sup>21</sup>** Why are you questioning me? Ask those who heard what I said to them. Look, they know what I said.” **<sup>22</sup>** When he said this, one of the officers standing nearby struck Jesus, saying, “Is that how you answer the high priest?” **<sup>23</sup>** Jesus replied to him, “If I spoke wrongly, testify about the wrong. But if I spoke correctly, then why do you strike me?” **<sup>24</sup>** Then Annas sent him, still bound, to Caiaphas the high priest.

**<sup>25</sup>** Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They said to him, “You’re not one of his disciples too, are you?” He denied it and said, “I am not.” **<sup>26</sup>** One of the high priest’s servants, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, said, “Didn’t I see you with him in the garden?” **<sup>27</sup>** Peter denied it again, and immediately a rooster crowed.

**<sup>28</sup>** Then they led Jesus from Caiaphas to the governor’s headquarters. It was early morning. They themselves did not enter the headquarters, so that they would not be defiled but could eat the Passover. **<sup>29</sup>** So Pilate went out to them and said, “What charge are you bringing against this man?” **<sup>30</sup>** They answered him, “If this man weren’t doing something wrong, we wouldn’t have handed him over to you.” **<sup>31</sup>** Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and judge him according to your law.” The Jews said to him, “It’s not lawful for us to put anyone to death.” **<sup>32</sup>** This happened so that the word Jesus had spoken might be fulfilled, indicating what kind of death he was going to die.

**<sup>33</sup>** Pilate then entered the headquarters again, called Jesus, and said to him, “Are you the King of the Jews?” **<sup>34</sup>** Jesus answered, “Are you saying this on your own, or did others tell you about me?” **<sup>35</sup>** Pilate replied, “Am I a Jew? Your own nation and the chief priests handed you over to me. What have you done?” **<sup>36</sup>** Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would be fighting to keep me from being handed over to the Jews. But as it is, my kingdom is not from here.” **<sup>37</sup>** Pilate said to him, “So you are a king?” Jesus answered, “You say that I am a king. For this purpose I was born, and for this I came into the world—to testify to the truth. Everyone who belongs to the truth listens to my voice.” **<sup>38</sup>** Pilate said to him, “What is truth?” After saying this, he went out again to the Jews and told them, “I find no guilt in him. **<sup>39</sup>** But you have a custom that I release one prisoner to you at the Passover. Do you want me to release the King of the Jews to you?” **<sup>40</sup>** They shouted back, “Not this man, but Barabbas!” Now Barabbas was a revolutionary. 

## Chapter 19

**<sup>1</sup>** Then Pilate took Jesus and had him flogged. **<sup>2</sup>** And the soldiers twisted together a crown of thorns and placed it on his head, and they dressed him in a purple robe. **<sup>3</sup>** They repeatedly approached him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” and struck him on the face. **<sup>4</sup>** Pilate went out again and said to them, “Look, I am bringing him out to you so that you may know that I find no basis for a charge against him.” **<sup>5</sup>** So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. Pilate said to them, “Behold the man!”

**<sup>6</sup>** When the chief priests and the officers saw him, they shouted, “Crucify him! Crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and crucify him, for I find no guilt in him.” **<sup>7</sup>** The Jews answered him, “We have a law, and according to that law he ought to die because he made himself the Son of God.” **<sup>8</sup>** When Pilate heard this statement, he was even more afraid. **<sup>9</sup>** He entered the governor’s headquarters again and said to Jesus, “Where are you from?” But Jesus gave him no answer. **<sup>10</sup>** So Pilate said to him, “Are you not speaking to me? Do you not know that I have authority to release you and authority to crucify you?” **<sup>11</sup>** Jesus answered him, “You would have no authority over me at all unless it had been given to you from above. Therefore, the one who handed me over to you has the greater sin.”

**<sup>12</sup>** From that moment, Pilate was seeking to release him, but the Jews kept shouting, “If you release this man, you are not Caesar’s friend! Everyone who makes himself a king opposes Caesar.” **<sup>13</sup>** So when Pilate heard these words, he brought Jesus out and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called The Stone Pavement, or in Hebrew, Gabbatha. **<sup>14</sup>** Now it was the day of Preparation for the Passover, about the sixth hour. He said to the Jews, “Behold your King!” **<sup>15</sup>** They shouted, “Away with him! Away with him! Crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Shall I crucify your King?” The chief priests answered, “We have no king but Caesar.” **<sup>16</sup>** So then he handed him over to them to be crucified.

**<sup>17</sup>** So they took Jesus, and he went out, carrying his own cross, to the place called The Place of the Skull, which in Hebrew is called Golgotha. **<sup>18</sup>** There they crucified him, and with him two others, one on either side, with Jesus in the middle. **<sup>19</sup>** Pilate also wrote an inscription and put it on the cross. It read, “Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.” **<sup>20</sup>** Many of the Jews read this inscription, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and it was written in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek. **<sup>21</sup>** So the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, “Do not write, ‘The King of the Jews,’ but rather, ‘This man said, I am King of the Jews.’” **<sup>22</sup>** Pilate answered, “What I have written, I have written.”

**<sup>23</sup>** When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his garments and divided them into four parts, one part for each soldier, and also his tunic. Now the tunic was seamless, woven in one piece from top to bottom. **<sup>24</sup>** So they said to one another, “Let us not tear it, but cast lots for it to see whose it will be.” This was to fulfill the Scripture that says, “They divided my garments among them, and for my clothing they cast lots.” So the soldiers did these things.

**<sup>25</sup>** Now standing by the cross of Jesus were his mother, his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. **<sup>26</sup>** When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, “Woman, behold your son!” **<sup>27</sup>** Then he said to the disciple, “Behold your mother!” And from that hour the disciple took her into his own home.

**<sup>28</sup>** After this, Jesus, knowing that all things were now accomplished, so that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said, “I am thirsty.” **<sup>29</sup>** A jar full of sour wine was sitting there, so they put a sponge full of the sour wine on a hyssop branch and held it to his mouth. **<sup>30</sup>** When Jesus had received the sour wine, he said, “It is finished,” and he bowed his head and gave up his breath.

**<sup>31</sup>** Since it was the day of Preparation, and so that the bodies would not remain on the cross on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a high day), the Jews asked Pilate that their legs might be broken and that they might be taken away. **<sup>32</sup>** So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first man and of the other who had been crucified with him. **<sup>33</sup>** But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs. **<sup>34</sup>** Instead, one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and at once blood and water came out. **<sup>35</sup>** And the one who saw this has testified, and his testimony is true, and he knows that he is telling the truth, so that you also may believe. **<sup>36</sup>** For these things happened so that the Scripture might be fulfilled: “Not one of his bones will be broken.” **<sup>37</sup>** And again another Scripture says, “They will look on him whom they have pierced.”

**<sup>38</sup>** After these things, Joseph of Arimathea, who was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, asked Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave him permission. So he came and took away his body. **<sup>39</sup>** Nicodemus, who had first come to Jesus by night, also came, bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about seventy-five pounds in weight. **<sup>40</sup>** So they took the body of Jesus and bound it in linen cloths with the spices, as is the burial custom of the Jews. **<sup>41</sup>** Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb in which no one had yet been laid. **<sup>42</sup>** So because of the Jewish day of Preparation, since the tomb was nearby, they laid Jesus there. 

## Chapter 20

**<sup>1</sup>** Now on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene came to the tomb early, while it was still dark, and saw the stone had been taken away from the tomb. **<sup>2</sup>** So she ran and came to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them, "They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him." **<sup>3</sup>** Then Peter and the other disciple went out and were going to the tomb. **<sup>4</sup>** The two were running together, and the other disciple outran Peter and came to the tomb first. **<sup>5</sup>** And stooping to look in, he saw the linen cloths lying there, but he did not go in. **<sup>6</sup>** Then Simon Peter came, following him, and went into the tomb, and he saw the linen cloths lying there, **<sup>7</sup>** and the face cloth, which had been on his head, not lying with the linen cloths but rolled up in a place by itself. **<sup>8</sup>** Then the other disciple, who had come to the tomb first, also went in, and he saw and believed. **<sup>9</sup>** For they did not yet understand the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead. **<sup>10</sup>** Then the disciples went back to their homes.

**<sup>11</sup>** But Mary was standing outside the tomb weeping. Then, as she was weeping, she stooped to look into the tomb, **<sup>12</sup>** and she saw two angels in white sitting, one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain. **<sup>13</sup>** And they said to her, "Woman, why are you weeping?" She said to them, "They have taken away my Lord, and I do not know where they have laid him." **<sup>14</sup>** Having said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not know that it was Jesus. **<sup>15</sup>** Jesus said to her, "Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you seeking?" Supposing him to be the gardener, she said to him, "Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away." **<sup>16</sup>** Jesus said to her, "Mary." Turning, she said to him in Hebrew, "Rabboni!" (which means Teacher). **<sup>17</sup>** Jesus said to her, "Do not cling to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers and say to them, 'I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.'" **<sup>18</sup>** Mary Magdalene went to the disciples, announcing "I have seen the Lord," and that he had said these things to her.

**<sup>19</sup>** Then, when it was evening on that day, the first day of the week, the doors where the disciples were staying had been locked for fear of the Jews. Jesus came and stood among them and said to them, "Peace be with you." **<sup>20</sup>** And having said this, he showed them his hands and his side. Then the disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord. **<sup>21</sup>** Jesus said to them again, "Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, so I send you." **<sup>22</sup>** And having said this, he breathed on them and said to them, "Receive the Holy Spirit. **<sup>23</sup>** If you forgive the sins of anyone, they are forgiven; if you retain the sins of any, they are retained."

**<sup>24</sup>** Now Thomas, one of the Twelve, called the Twin, was not with them when Jesus came. **<sup>25</sup>** So the other disciples were saying to him, "We have seen the Lord." But he said to them, "Unless I see in his hands the mark of the nails, and place my finger into the mark of the nails, and place my hand into his side, I will never believe." **<sup>26</sup>** And after eight days his disciples were again inside, and Thomas was with them. Though the doors were locked, Jesus came and stood among them and said, "Peace be with you." **<sup>27</sup>** Then he said to Thomas, "Put your finger here, and see my hands; and put out your hand, and place it in my side. Do not disbelieve, but believe." **<sup>28</sup>** Thomas answered and said to him, "My Lord and my God!" **<sup>29</sup>** Jesus said to him, "Because you have seen me, you have believed; blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed."

**<sup>30</sup>** Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of the disciples, which are not written in this book; **<sup>31</sup>** but these are written so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name. 

## Chapter 21

**<sup>1</sup>** After these things, Jesus revealed himself again to the disciples by the Sea of Tiberias, and he revealed himself in this way: **<sup>2</sup>** Simon Peter, Thomas (called the Twin), Nathanael from Cana of Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were together. **<sup>3</sup>** Simon Peter said to them, "I’m going fishing." They said to him, "We’re coming with you, too." They went out and got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing.

**<sup>4</sup>** When morning had already come, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples didn’t know that it was Jesus. **<sup>5</sup>** So Jesus said to them, "Children, you don’t have any fish, do you?" They answered him, "No." **<sup>6</sup>** He said to them, "Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and you’ll find some." So they cast it, and then they weren’t able to haul it in because of the large number of fish.

**<sup>7</sup>** Then that disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, "It’s the Lord!" When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he put on his outer garment (for he was stripped down) and jumped into the sea. **<sup>8</sup>** But the other disciples came in the little boat, dragging the net full of fish, for they were not far from shore, only about a hundred yards away.

**<sup>9</sup>** When they got out onto the land, they saw a charcoal fire there with fish lying on it and bread. **<sup>10</sup>** Jesus said to them, "Bring some of the fish you just caught." **<sup>11</sup>** Simon Peter went up and dragged the net to land, full of large fish—one hundred fifty-three of them. And even though there were so many, the net wasn’t torn.

**<sup>12</sup>** Jesus said to them, "Come, have breakfast." None of the disciples dared to ask him, "Who are you?" because they knew it was the Lord. **<sup>13</sup>** Jesus came, took the bread, and gave it to them, and did the same with the fish. **<sup>14</sup>** This was now the third time Jesus was revealed to the disciples after he was raised from the dead.

**<sup>15</sup>** When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these?" He said to him, "Yes, Lord, you know that I love you." He said to him, "Feed my lambs." **<sup>16</sup>** He said to him again a second time, "Simon, son of John, do you love me?" He said to him, "Yes, Lord, you know that I love you." He said to him, "Tend my sheep." **<sup>17</sup>** He said to him the third time, "Simon, son of John, do you love me?" Peter was grieved because he said to him the third time, "Do you love me?" And he said to him, "Lord, you know everything; you know that I love you." Jesus said to him, "Feed my sheep.

**<sup>18</sup>** Truly, truly, I tell you, when you were younger, you dressed yourself and walked wherever you wanted; but when you grow old, you’ll stretch out your hands, and someone else will dress you and bring you to where you don’t want to go." **<sup>19</sup>** He said this to indicate by what kind of death he would glorify God. And after saying this, he said to him, "Follow me."

**<sup>20</sup>** Peter turned and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following them—the one who also had leaned back against him at the supper and said, "Lord, who is the one betraying you?" **<sup>21</sup>** When Peter saw him, he said to Jesus, "Lord, what about him?" **<sup>22</sup>** Jesus said to him, "If I want him to remain until I come, what’s that to you? You follow me!" **<sup>23</sup>** So the rumor spread among the brethren that this disciple wouldn’t die. But Jesus didn’t say to him that he wouldn’t die, only, "If I want him to remain until I come, what’s that to you?"

**<sup>24</sup>** This is the disciple who testifies about these things and who wrote them down, and we know that his testimony is true. **<sup>25</sup>** There are also many other things that Jesus did, which, if every one of them were written down, I suppose the world itself couldn’t contain the books that would be written. 