# The Second Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians

## Chapter 1

**<sup>1</sup>** Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, to the church of God that is in Corinth, together with all the saints who are in all Achaia: **<sup>2</sup>** Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

**<sup>3</sup>** Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort, **<sup>4</sup>** who comforts us in all our affliction, so that we may be able to comfort those who are in any affliction, through the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God. **<sup>5</sup>** For just as the sufferings of Christ abound for us, so also through Christ our comfort abounds. **<sup>6</sup>** If we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation; if we are comforted, it is for your comfort, which produces in you patient endurance of the same sufferings that we also suffer. **<sup>7</sup>** And our hope for you is firm, because we know that as you share in the sufferings, so also you will share in the comfort.

**<sup>8</sup>** For we do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the affliction we experienced in Asia, that we were burdened excessively, beyond our strength, so that we despaired even of life itself. **<sup>9</sup>** Indeed, we had the sentence of death within ourselves, so that we would not rely on ourselves but on God, who raises the dead. **<sup>10</sup>** He delivered us from such a deadly peril, and he will deliver us. We have set our hope on him, that he will yet again deliver us, **<sup>11</sup>** while you also help us by your prayers, so that thanks may be given by many on our behalf for the gracious gift bestowed on us through the prayers of many.

**<sup>12</sup>** For our boast is this: the testimony of our conscience, that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially toward you, with simplicity and godly sincerity—not by human wisdom but by the grace of God. **<sup>13</sup>** For we are not writing you anything other than what you read and understand—and I hope you will understand fully, **<sup>14</sup>** just as you have partially understood us—that we are your boast, just as you also are ours on the day of our Lord Jesus.

**<sup>15</sup>** Because I was confident of this, I intended to come to you first, so that you might have a second experience of grace, **<sup>16</sup>** and through you to pass on to Macedonia, and from Macedonia to come again to you, and by you to be sent on my way to Judea. **<sup>17</sup>** Was I vacillating when I intended this? Or do I make my plans according to the flesh, saying "Yes, yes" and "No, no" at the same time? **<sup>18</sup>** But as God is faithful, our word to you has not been "Yes and no." **<sup>19</sup>** For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, whom we preached among you—Silvanus, Timothy, and I—was not "Yes and no," but in him it has always been "Yes." **<sup>20</sup>** For all the promises of God in him are "Yes." Therefore also through him the "Amen" is spoken by us to the glory of God. **<sup>21</sup>** Now it is God who establishes us with you in Christ and has anointed us, **<sup>22</sup>** and who has also sealed us and given us the Spirit in our hearts as a guarantee.

**<sup>23</sup>** But I call God as witness against my soul—that it was to spare you that I did not come again to Corinth. **<sup>24</sup>** Not that we lord it over your faith, but we work with you for your joy, for you stand firm in the faith. 

## Chapter 2

**<sup>1</sup>** So I decided this for myself: that I would not come to you again in sorrow. **<sup>2</sup>** For if I cause you sorrow, who then makes me glad but the one I made sorrowful? **<sup>3</sup>** And I wrote this very thing so that when I came, I would not have sorrow from those who ought to make me rejoice, having confidence in all of you that my joy is the joy of you all. **<sup>4</sup>** For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote to you with many tears—not so that you would be grieved, but that you might know the love I have especially for you.

**<sup>5</sup>** But if anyone has caused sorrow, he has not grieved me, but in part—so that I may not overstate it—all of you. **<sup>6</sup>** This punishment by the majority is sufficient for such a man, **<sup>7</sup>** so that now, on the contrary, you should rather forgive and comfort him, lest such a one be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow. **<sup>8</sup>** Therefore I urge you to reaffirm your love for him. **<sup>9</sup>** For this is why I also wrote: to test you and to know whether you are obedient in everything. **<sup>10</sup>** But the one whom you forgive, I also forgive; for indeed, what I have forgiven—if I have forgiven anything—I did it for your sake in the presence of Christ, **<sup>11</sup>** so that we would not be outwitted by Satan; for we are not ignorant of his schemes.

**<sup>12</sup>** Now when I came to Troas for the gospel of Christ and a door was opened for me in the Lord, **<sup>13</sup>** I had no rest in my spirit, because I did not find my brother Titus. So I said farewell to them and went on to Macedonia.

**<sup>14</sup>** But thanks be to God, who always leads us in triumphal procession in Christ, and through us spreads the fragrance of the knowledge of Him in every place. **<sup>15</sup>** For we are a fragrance of Christ to God among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing— **<sup>16</sup>** to the one an aroma from death to death, to the other an aroma from life to life. And who is sufficient for these things? **<sup>17</sup>** For we are not like many, peddling the word of God; but as from sincerity, and as from God, we speak in Christ before God. 

## Chapter 3

**<sup>1</sup>** Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or do we need, like some, letters of recommendation to you or from you? **<sup>2</sup>** You yourselves are our letter, written on our hearts, known and read by all men. **<sup>3</sup>** You show that you are a letter from Christ delivered by us, written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone but on tablets of human hearts. **<sup>4</sup>** Such is the confidence we have through Christ before God.

**<sup>5</sup>** Not that we are sufficient in ourselves to consider anything as coming from ourselves, but our sufficiency is from God, **<sup>6</sup>** who also made us sufficient as ministers of a new covenant—not of the letter but of the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.

**<sup>7</sup>** But if the ministry of death, engraved in letters on stone, came with glory, so that the sons of Israel could not gaze at Moses’ face because of its glory—though it was fading— **<sup>8</sup>** how will the ministry of the Spirit not be even more glorious? **<sup>9</sup>** For if the ministry of condemnation had glory, much more does the ministry of righteousness abound in glory. **<sup>10</sup>** For indeed, what once had glory has now no glory at all, because of the glory that surpasses it. **<sup>11</sup>** For if what was fading came with glory, much more will what remains be in glory.

**<sup>12</sup>** Therefore, since we have such a hope, we speak with great boldness, **<sup>13</sup>** and not like Moses, who would put a veil over his face so that the sons of Israel might not gaze at what was to eventually fade away.

**<sup>14</sup>** But their minds were hardened; for until this very day the same veil remains when the old covenant is read—it has not been removed, because only in Christ is it taken away. **<sup>15</sup>** But to this day, whenever Moses is read, a veil lies over their hearts. **<sup>16</sup>** But whenever a man turns to the Lord, the veil is taken away.

**<sup>17</sup>** Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom. **<sup>18</sup>** And we all, with unveiled faces, beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image from glory to glory, just as from the Lord, who is the Spirit. 

## Chapter 4

**<sup>1</sup>** Therefore, having this ministry by the mercy of God, we do not lose heart. **<sup>2</sup>** But we have renounced disgraceful, underhanded ways. We do not walk in craftiness, nor do we falsify the word of God. Instead, by the open statement of the truth, we commend ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. **<sup>3</sup>** And even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled to those who are perishing. **<sup>4</sup>** In their case, the god of this age has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, to keep them from seeing the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God. **<sup>5</sup>** For we do not preach ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake. **<sup>6</sup>** For God, who said, “Let light shine out of darkness,” is the one who has shone in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

**<sup>7</sup>** But we have this treasure in jars of clay, so that the surpassing power may be of God and not from us. **<sup>8</sup>** We are afflicted in every way, but not crushed; perplexed, but not in despair; **<sup>9</sup>** persecuted, but not forsaken; struck down, but not destroyed. **<sup>10</sup>** Always carrying in the body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our body. **<sup>11</sup>** For we who live are always being given over to death for Jesus’ sake, so that the life of Jesus also may be revealed in our mortal flesh. **<sup>12</sup>** So death is at work in us, but life in you.

**<sup>13</sup>** Since we have the same spirit of faith, according to what is written, “I believed, and so I spoke,” we also believe, and so we also speak, **<sup>14</sup>** knowing that he who raised the Lord Jesus will also raise us with Jesus and bring us with you into his presence. **<sup>15</sup>** For all these things are for your sake, so that the grace that extends to more and more men may increase thanksgiving, to the glory of God.

**<sup>16</sup>** So we do not lose heart. Though our outer man is wasting away, our inner man is being renewed day by day. **<sup>17</sup>** For this light momentary affliction is preparing for us an eternal weight of glory beyond all comparison, **<sup>18</sup>** as we look not to the things that are seen but to the things that are unseen. For the things that are seen are temporary, but the things that are unseen are eternal. 

## Chapter 5

**<sup>1</sup>** For we know that if the earthly tent we dwell in is destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made by hands, eternal in the heavens. **<sup>2</sup>** For indeed, in this tent we groan, longing to be clothed with our heavenly dwelling— **<sup>3</sup>** if indeed, when we are clothed, we will not be found naked. **<sup>4</sup>** For while we are in this tent, we groan, being burdened—not that we want to be unclothed, but to be clothed, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. **<sup>5</sup>** Now the one who prepared us for this very purpose is God, who gave us the Spirit as a guarantee.

**<sup>6</sup>** Therefore we are always confident, knowing that while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord— **<sup>7</sup>** for we walk by faith, not by sight. **<sup>8</sup>** We are confident, then, and would prefer rather to be absent from the body and to be at home with the Lord. **<sup>9</sup>** Therefore we also make it our aim, whether at home or absent, to be pleasing to him. **<sup>10</sup>** For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each man may receive what is due for what he has done in the flesh, whether good or evil.

**<sup>11</sup>** Therefore, knowing the fear of the Lord, we persuade men. But we are made manifest to God, and I hope also made manifest in your consciences. **<sup>12</sup>** We are not again commending ourselves to you, but giving you an opportunity to boast on our behalf, so that you may have something to answer those who boast in appearance and not in heart. **<sup>13</sup>** For if we were out of our minds, it was for God; if we are of sound mind, it is for you. **<sup>14</sup>** For the love of Christ compels us, because we have concluded this: that one died for all, therefore all died. **<sup>15</sup>** And he died for all, so that those who live might no longer live for themselves but for him who died and was raised for their sake.

**<sup>16</sup>** Therefore, from now on we regard no man according to the flesh. Even though we once regarded Christ according to the flesh, we regard him in this way no longer. **<sup>17</sup>** Therefore, if any man is in Christ, he is a new creation; the old has passed away—behold, the new has come. **<sup>18</sup>** All this is from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of reconciliation, **<sup>19</sup>** that is, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not counting their trespasses against them, and entrusting to us the message of reconciliation. **<sup>20</sup>** Therefore we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God were making his appeal through us. We implore you on behalf of Christ: be reconciled to God. **<sup>21</sup>** He made him who knew no sin to be sin for us, so that we might become the righteousness of God in him. 

## Chapter 6

**<sup>1</sup>** As fellow workers, we urge you not to receive the grace of God in vain. **<sup>2</sup>** For he says, “At an acceptable time I listened to you, and on a day of salvation I helped you.” Look, now is the acceptable time; look, now is the day of salvation. **<sup>3</sup>** We put no obstacle in anyone’s way, so that our ministry may not be faulted, **<sup>4</sup>** but in everything we commend ourselves as servants of God: in great endurance, in afflictions, in hardships, in distresses, **<sup>5</sup>** in beatings, in imprisonments, in riots, in labors, in sleepless nights, in times of hunger; **<sup>6</sup>** in purity, in knowledge, in patience, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in genuine love, **<sup>7</sup>** in the word of truth, in the power of God; with the weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left; **<sup>8</sup>** through glory and dishonor, through slander and praise; regarded as deceivers and yet true, **<sup>9</sup>** as unknown and yet well known, as dying and yet we live, as disciplined and yet not put to death, **<sup>10</sup>** as sorrowful yet always rejoicing, as poor yet making many rich, as having nothing and yet possessing everything.

**<sup>11</sup>** We have spoken freely to you, Corinthians; our heart is wide open. **<sup>12</sup>** You are not restricted by us, but you are restricted in your own affections. **<sup>13</sup>** Now, in return—I speak as to children—you also open your hearts wide.

**<sup>14</sup>** Do not be unequally yoked with unbelievers. For what partnership does righteousness have with lawlessness? Or what fellowship does light have with darkness? **<sup>15</sup>** What harmony does Christ have with Belial (wickedness)? Or what part does a believer share with an unbeliever? **<sup>16</sup>** What agreement does the temple of God have with idols? For we are the temple of the living God, just as God said:

“I will dwell among them and walk among them,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and I will be their God,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and they shall be my people.

**<sup>17</sup>** Therefore,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘Come out from among them,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and be separate,’ says the Lord,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘and do not touch what is unclean;<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and I will receive you,<br/>
**<sup>18</sup>** and I will be a father to you,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and you shall be sons and daughters to me,<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;says the Lord Almighty.’”<br/>


## Chapter 7

**<sup>1</sup>** Since we have these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from every defilement of flesh and spirit, bringing holiness to completion in the fear of God.

**<sup>2</sup>** Make room for us in your hearts. We have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have taken advantage of no one. **<sup>3</sup>** I do not say this to condemn you, for I have said before that you are in our hearts, to die together and to live together. **<sup>4</sup>** Great is my confidence in you, great is my boasting on your behalf. I am filled with comfort; I overflow with joy in all our affliction.

**<sup>5</sup>** For even when we came into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were afflicted in every way—conflicts on the outside, fears within. **<sup>6</sup>** But God, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the arrival of Titus, **<sup>7</sup>** and not only by his arrival but also by the comfort with which he was comforted among you, as he reported to us your longing, your mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced even more.

**<sup>8</sup>** For even if I made you grieve with my letter, I do not regret it—though I did regret it, for I see that that letter grieved you, though only for a short time. **<sup>9</sup>** Now I rejoice, not that you were grieved, but that you were grieved to repentance. For you were grieved according to the will of God, so that you suffered no loss through us. **<sup>10</sup>** For godly grief produces a repentance that leads to salvation without regret, but worldly grief produces death. **<sup>11</sup>** For see what earnestness this very thing—this godly grief—has produced in you, what eagerness to clear yourselves, what indignation, what fear, what longing, what zeal, what punishment! In everything you have proved yourselves to be innocent in this matter. **<sup>12</sup>** So although I wrote to you, it was not for the sake of the one who did wrong, nor for the sake of the one who suffered the wrong, but in order that your earnestness for us might be revealed to you before God. **<sup>13</sup>** Therefore we have been comforted.

And in addition to our comfort, we rejoiced even more at the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by you all.**<sup>14</sup>** For if I have boasted anything to him about you, I was not put to shame. But just as everything we said to you was in truth, so also our boasting before Titus proved to be true. **<sup>15</sup>** And his affection for you is even greater as he remembers the obedience of you all, how you received him with fear and trembling. **<sup>16</sup>** I rejoice that in everything I have confidence in you. 

## Chapter 8

**<sup>1</sup>** We want you to know, brothers, about the grace of God that has been given among the churches of Macedonia. **<sup>2</sup>** For in a severe test of affliction, their abundance of joy and their extreme poverty overflowed in a wealth of generosity on their part. **<sup>3</sup>** For I bear witness that they gave according to their means, and beyond their means—of their own accord— **<sup>4</sup>** begging us earnestly for the favor of taking part in the ministry to the saints. **<sup>5</sup>** And they did this not as we expected, but they gave themselves first to the Lord and then to us by the will of God.

**<sup>6</sup>** Accordingly, we urged Titus that, just as he had begun, so he should also complete among you this gracious work. **<sup>7</sup>** But as you excel in everything—in faith, in speech, in knowledge, in all diligence, and in your love for us—see that you also excel in this act of grace.

**<sup>8</sup>** I am not saying this as a command, but to prove by the earnestness of others that your love is genuine. **<sup>9</sup>** For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sake he became poor, so that you by his poverty might become rich. **<sup>10</sup>** And in this matter I give my judgment: this benefits you, who a year ago began not only to do this work but also to desire to do it. **<sup>11</sup>** So now complete the doing of it, so that your readiness in desiring it may be matched by your completing it out of what you have. **<sup>12</sup>** For if the readiness is there, it is acceptable according to what a man has, not according to what he does not have.

**<sup>13</sup>** For I do not mean that others should be eased and you burdened, but that as a matter of fairness, **<sup>14</sup>** your abundance at the present time should supply their need, so that their abundance may supply your need, that there may be equality. **<sup>15</sup>** As it is written, “He who gathered much had nothing left over, and he who gathered little had no lack.”

**<sup>16</sup>** But thanks be to God, who put the same earnest care for you into the heart of Titus. **<sup>17</sup>** For he accepted our appeal; being himself very earnest, he is going to you of his own accord. **<sup>18</sup>** And we are sending with him the brother who is praised among all the churches for his work in the gospel. **<sup>19</sup>** And not only that, but he has also been appointed by the churches to travel with us in this act of grace that is being administered by us, for the glory of the Lord himself and to show our good will. **<sup>20</sup>** We take this precaution so that no one should blame us regarding this generous gift that we are administering. **<sup>21</sup>** For we aim at what is honorable not only in the sight of the Lord but also in the sight of men.

**<sup>22</sup>** And we are sending with them our brother whom we have often tested and found earnest in many matters, but who is now even more earnest because of his great confidence in you. **<sup>23</sup>** As for Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker for your benefit. And as for our brothers, they are messengers of the churches, the glory of Christ. **<sup>24</sup>** So give proof before the churches of your love and of our boasting about you to these men. 

## Chapter 9

**<sup>1</sup>** For it is unnecessary for me to write to you about the ministry to the saints, **<sup>2</sup>** for I know your readiness, of which I boast about you to the Macedonians, saying that Achaia has been prepared since last year. And your zeal has stirred up most of them. **<sup>3</sup>** But I have sent the brothers so that our boasting about you may not be empty in this case, so that, as I said, you may be prepared. **<sup>4</sup>** Otherwise, if any Macedonians come with me and find you unprepared, we—not to mention you—would be put to shame in this situation of confident boasting. **<sup>5</sup>** So I thought it necessary to urge the brothers that they should go on ahead to you and arrange beforehand the generous gift you promised, so that it may be ready as a gift and not as something extorted.

**<sup>6</sup>** Now this I say: he who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and he who sows generously will also reap generously. **<sup>7</sup>** Each man should give just as he has decided in his heart, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver. **<sup>8</sup>** And God is able to make all grace abound to you, so that in everything, at all times, having all that you need, you may abound in every good work. **<sup>9</sup>** As it is written: “He has distributed freely, he has given to the poor; his righteousness endures forever.” **<sup>10</sup>** Now he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will supply and multiply your seed and increase the harvest of your righteousness. **<sup>11</sup>** You will be enriched in every way for all generosity, which through us produces thanksgiving to God. **<sup>12</sup>** For the ministry of this service is not only supplying the needs of the saints, but is also overflowing with many thanksgivings to God. **<sup>13</sup>** Through the proof of this ministry they glorify God because of the obedience of your confession to the gospel of Christ, and for the generosity of your sharing with them and with everyone. **<sup>14</sup>** And in their prayers for you, they long for you because of the surpassing grace of God upon you. **<sup>15</sup>** Thanks be to God for his indescribable gift! 

## Chapter 10

**<sup>1</sup>** Now I, Paul, appeal to you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ—I who am humble when face to face with you, but bold toward you when away. **<sup>2</sup>** I beg you that when I am present, I may not have to be bold with the confidence I count on when I intend to be daring against some who think we are walking according to the flesh. **<sup>3</sup>** For though we walk in the flesh, we do not wage war according to the flesh. **<sup>4</sup>** For the weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh but have divine power to destroy strongholds. **<sup>5</sup>** We demolish arguments and every lofty opinion raised against the knowledge of God, and we take every thought captive to obey Christ. **<sup>6</sup>** And we are ready to punish every disobedience, whenever your obedience is complete.

**<sup>7</sup>** Look at what is obvious. If anyone is confident that he belongs to Christ, let him remind himself that just as he belongs to Christ, so also do we. **<sup>8</sup>** For even if I boast a little too much about our authority—which the Lord gave for building you up and not for tearing you down—I will not be ashamed. **<sup>9</sup>** I do not want to seem as though I am frightening you by my letters. **<sup>10</sup>** For they say, “His letters are weighty and strong, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech is of no account.”

**<sup>11</sup>** Let such a man consider this: what we are in word by letters when absent, such we will be in deed when present. **<sup>12</sup>** For we do not dare to classify or compare ourselves with some of those who commend themselves. But when they measure themselves by one another and compare themselves with one another, they are without understanding.

**<sup>13</sup>** We, however, will not boast beyond limits, but will boast only with regard to the area of influence God assigned to us, to reach even as far as you. **<sup>14</sup>** For we are not overextending ourselves, as though we did not reach you. For we were the first to come all the way to you with the gospel of Christ. **<sup>15</sup>** We do not boast beyond limit in the labors of others, but we have the hope that as your faith increases, our area of influence among you may be greatly enlarged, **<sup>16</sup>** so that we may preach the gospel in lands beyond you, without boasting about work already done in another man's area of influence.

**<sup>17</sup>** Let the one who boasts, boast in the Lord. **<sup>18</sup>** For it is not the one who commends himself who is approved, but the one whom the Lord commends. 

## Chapter 11

**<sup>1</sup>** I wish you would bear with me in a little foolishness—indeed, do bear with me! **<sup>2</sup>** For I am jealous for you with a godly jealousy, for I betrothed you to one husband, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ. **<sup>3</sup>** But I fear that just as the serpent deceived Eve by his cunning, your thoughts might be led astray from a sincere and pure devotion to Christ.

**<sup>4</sup>** For if someone comes and proclaims another Jesus than the one we proclaimed, or if you receive a different spirit than the one you received, or a different gospel than the one you accepted, you put up with it readily enough. **<sup>5</sup>** For I consider myself in no way inferior to these “super-apostles.” **<sup>6</sup>** Even if I am unskilled in speaking, I am not so in knowledge; indeed, in every way we have made this clear to you in all things.

**<sup>7</sup>** Or did I commit a sin by humbling myself so that you might be exalted, because I preached the gospel of God to you free of charge? **<sup>8</sup>** I robbed other churches by accepting support from them in order to serve you. **<sup>9</sup>** And when I was with you and in need, I did not burden anyone, for the brothers who came from Macedonia supplied my need. So I refrained and will refrain from burdening you in any way. **<sup>10</sup>** As the truth of Christ is in me, this boasting of mine will not be silenced in the regions of Achaia. **<sup>11</sup>** Why? Because I do not love you? God knows I do!

**<sup>12</sup>** But what I am doing I will continue to do, in order to cut off the opportunity from those who desire an opportunity to be regarded just as we are in what they boast about. **<sup>13</sup>** For such men are false apostles, deceitful workers, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ. **<sup>14</sup>** And no wonder, for even Satan disguises himself as an angel of light. **<sup>15</sup>** So it is no great surprise if his servants also disguise themselves as servants of righteousness. Their end will be according to their deeds.

**<sup>16</sup>** I repeat, let no one think me foolish. But even if you do, then accept me as a fool, so that I too may boast a little. **<sup>17</sup>** What I am saying in this boastful confidence, I am not speaking as the Lord would, but as a fool. **<sup>18</sup>** Since many boast according to the flesh, I too will boast. **<sup>19</sup>** For you gladly bear with fools, since you are so wise yourselves! **<sup>20</sup>** For you bear it if someone enslaves you, devours you, takes advantage of you, exalts himself, or strikes you in the face.

**<sup>21</sup>** To my shame, I must say that we were too weak for that! But whatever anyone else dares to boast of—I am speaking foolishly—I also dare to boast of that. **<sup>22</sup>** Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I. **<sup>23</sup>** Are they servants of Christ? I am speaking like a madman—I am more so: with far greater labors, far more imprisonments, countless beatings, and often near death.

**<sup>24</sup>** Five times I received from the Jews forty lashes minus one. **<sup>25</sup>** Three times I was beaten with rods. Once I was stoned. Three times I was shipwrecked; a night and a day I was adrift at sea. **<sup>26</sup>** On frequent journeys, in danger from rivers, danger from robbers, danger from my own countrymen, danger from Gentiles, danger in the city, danger in the wilderness, danger at sea, danger from false brothers; **<sup>27</sup>** in labor and hardship, through many sleepless nights, in hunger and thirst, often without food, in cold and exposure.

**<sup>28</sup>** And besides all this, there is the daily pressure on me of concern for all the churches. **<sup>29</sup>** Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is made to stumble, and I do not burn with indignation?

**<sup>30</sup>** If I must boast, I will boast of the things that show my weakness. **<sup>31</sup>** The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, who is blessed forever, knows that I am not lying. **<sup>32</sup>** In Damascus, the governor under King Aretas was guarding the city of the Damascenes in order to arrest me, **<sup>33</sup>** but I was let down in a basket through a window in the wall and escaped his hands. 

## Chapter 12

**<sup>1</sup>** I must go on boasting—though it is not beneficial, I will now come to visions and revelations from the Lord. **<sup>2</sup>** I know a man in Christ who, fourteen years ago—whether in the body I do not know, or out of the body I do not know, God knows—was caught up to the third heaven. **<sup>3</sup>** And I know that this man—whether in the body or apart from the body I do not know, God knows— **<sup>4</sup>** was caught up into Paradise and heard inexpressible words, which a man is not permitted to speak. **<sup>5</sup>** On behalf of such a man I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast, except in my weaknesses. **<sup>6</sup>** For if I should wish to boast, I would not be foolish, for I would be speaking the truth. But I refrain, so that no one may think more of me than what he sees in me or hears from me, **<sup>7</sup>** even because of the surpassing greatness of the revelations. Therefore, in order that I might not become conceited, a thorn in the flesh was given to me, a messenger of Satan to torment me, so that I might not be conceited. **<sup>8</sup>** I pleaded with the Lord three times about this, that it might leave me. **<sup>9</sup>** But he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for power is perfected in weakness.” Therefore I will most gladly boast all the more in my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may rest upon me. **<sup>10</sup>** For this reason I am content with weaknesses, with insults, with hardships, with persecutions and difficulties, for the sake of Christ. For when I am weak, then I am strong.

**<sup>11</sup>** I have become foolish—you forced me to it. For I ought to have been commended by you, since I am in no way inferior to the super-apostles, even though I am nothing. **<sup>12</sup>** The signs of a true apostle were performed among you with all perseverance—signs and wonders and mighty works. **<sup>13</sup>** For in what were you inferior to the rest of the churches, except that I myself was not a burden to you? Forgive me this wrong!

**<sup>14</sup>** Look, this is the third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be a burden, for I do not seek what is yours, but you. For children ought not to save up for their parents, but parents for their children. **<sup>15</sup>** And I will most gladly spend and be completely spent for your souls. If I love you more, am I to be loved less? **<sup>16</sup>** But let it be granted that I did not burden you—still, being crafty, I took you in by deceit! **<sup>17</sup>** Did I take advantage of you through any of those I sent to you? **<sup>18</sup>** I urged Titus to go, and I sent the brother with him. Did Titus take advantage of you? Did we not walk in the same spirit, in the same steps?

**<sup>19</sup>** Have you been thinking all this time that we are defending ourselves to you? Before God we are speaking in Christ, and all for your upbuilding, beloved. **<sup>20</sup>** For I fear that perhaps when I come I may not find you as I wish, and that I may be found by you not as you wish; that perhaps there may be strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, selfish ambition, slander, gossip, arrogance, disorder. **<sup>21</sup>** I fear that when I come again, my God may humble me before you, and I may mourn over many who previously sinned and have not repented of the impurity, sexual immorality, and debauchery that they have practiced. 

## Chapter 13

**<sup>1</sup>** This is the third time I am coming to you. "Every charge must be established by the evidence of two or three witnesses." **<sup>2</sup>** I warned those who sinned before and all the others, and I warn them now while absent, as I did when present on my second visit, that if I come again I will not spare them, **<sup>3</sup>** since you seek proof that Christ is speaking in me. He is not weak in dealing with you but is powerful among you. **<sup>4</sup>** For he was crucified in weakness, but lives by the power of God. For we also are weak in him, but in dealing with you we will live with him by the power of God.

**<sup>5</sup>** Examine yourselves to see whether you are in the faith. Test yourselves. Or do you not realize this about yourselves, that Jesus Christ is in you?—unless indeed you fail to meet the test! **<sup>6</sup>** I hope you will find out that we have not failed the test.

**<sup>7</sup>** But we pray to God that you may do no wrong—not that we may appear to have met the test, but that you may do what is right, even though we may seem to have failed. **<sup>8</sup>** For we cannot do anything against the truth, but only for the truth. **<sup>9</sup>** For we are glad when we are weak and you are strong. Your restoration is what we pray for. **<sup>10</sup>** For this reason I write these things while I am away from you, that when I come I may not have to be severe in my use of the authority that the Lord has given me for building up and not for tearing down.

**<sup>11</sup>** Finally, brothers, rejoice. Aim for restoration, comfort one another, agree with one another, live in peace; and the God of love and peace will be with you.

**<sup>12</sup>** Greet one another with a holy kiss.

**<sup>13</sup>** All the saints greet you.

**<sup>14</sup>** The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all. 